
Praise for Six of Crows
‘This has all the right elements to keep readers enthralled: a cunning leader
with a plan for every occasion, nigh-impossible odds, an entertaining
combative team of skilled misfits, a twisty plot, and a nerve-wracking
cliffhanger.’
Publishers Weekly, starred review
‘Cracking page-turner with a multiethnic band of misfits with differing
sexual orientations who satisfyingly, believably jell into a family.’
Kirkus Reviews, starred review
‘Bardugo outdoes herself with this book, creating the gorgeously built
backdrop of Ketterdam and populating it with a sophisticated cast of rogues
and criminals. Six of Crows is a twisty and elegantly crafted masterpiece
that thrilled me from beginning to end.’
Holly Black
Praise for The Grisha Trilogy
‘A New York Times bestseller, it’s like The Hunger Games meets Potter
meets Twilight meets Lord Of The Rings meets Game Of Thrones; basically
epic magical fantasy but completely for grown-ups.’
Stylist
‘Unlike anything I’ve ever read.’
Veronica Roth, author of the Divergent trilogy
‘A heady blend of fantasy, romance and adventure.’
Rick Riordan, author of the Percy Jackson series
‘Mesmerising … Bardugo’s set up is shiver-inducing, of the delicious
variety. This is what fantasy is for.’
New York Times
‘Shadow and Bone was a dark, rich, utterly compelling book that did not let
me go from the very first word to the very last. I loved it, loved it, loved it,
loved it!’
Guardian Teen
‘This engaging YA adventure takes a different and distinctly Russian
approach to epic fantasy …
Giving us a convincingly chilly and well-thought-out world as well as a
touchingly played romance, Leigh Bardugo’s fantasy is effortlessly
readable.’
SFX
‘In this richly-imagined and beautifully-written novel, Leigh Bardugo has
created a vivid fantasy world drawing on Russian traditions and folklore.
With unexpected twists and turns, and plenty of action and romance, this is
a pacy and exciting adventure, but also a multi-layered story of selfdiscovery, with an intelligent and compelling heroine in Alina.’
Booktrust
‘Leigh is a writer of the best kind because she loves her characters and the
world they live in and makes a reader jealous that they can’t visit it. There
is magic in these pages.’
Sister Spooky
Contents
Praise for Six of Crows
Title Page
Dedication
Maps
The Grisha
Part 1: Shadow Business
1 Joost
2 Inej
3 Kaz
4 Inej
5 Kaz
6 Nina
Part 2: Servant and Lever
7 Matthias
8 Jesper
9 Kaz
10 Inej
11 Jesper
12 Inej
13 Kaz
14 Nina
15 Matthias
Part 3: Heartsick
16 Inej
17 Jesper
18 Kaz
19 Matthias
20 Nina
Part 4: The Trick to Falling
21 Inej
22 Kaz
23 Jesper
24 Nina
25 Inej
26 Kaz
Part 5: The Ice Does Not Forgive
27 Jesper
28 Inej
29 Matthias
30 Jesper
31 Nina
32 Jesper
33 Inej
34 Nina
35 Matthias
36 Jesper
37 Nina
38 Kaz
Part 6: Proper Thieves
39 Inej
40 Nina
41 Matthias
42 Inej
43 Nina
44 Jesper
45 Kaz
46 Pekka
Acknowledgements
Copyright
To Kayte – secret weapon, unexpected friend

THE GRISHA
SOLDIERS OF THE SECOND ARMY
MASTERS OF THE SMALL SCIENCE
CORPORALKI
(The Order of the Living and the Dead)
He artre nde rs
He ale rs
ETHEREALKI
(The Order of Summoners)
Squalle rs
Infe rni
Tide make rs
MATERIALKI
(The Order of Fabrikators)
Durasts
Alke mi
PART 1
SHADOW BUSINESS
Joost had two problems: the moon and his moustache.
He was supposed to be making his rounds at the Hoede house, but for the
last fifteen minutes, he’d been hovering around the south-east wall of the
gardens, trying to think of something clever and romantic to say to Anya.
If only Anya’s eyes were blue like the sea or green like an emerald. Instead,
her eyes were brown –
lovely, dreamy … melted chocolate brown? Rabbit fur brown?
“Just tell her she’s got skin like moonlight,” his friend Pieter had said.
“Girls love that.”
A perfect solution, but the Ketterdam weather was not cooperating. There’d
been no breeze off the harbour that day, and a grey milk fog had wreathed
the city’s canals and crooked alleys in damp. Even here among the
mansions of the Geldstraat, the air hung thick with the smell of fish and
bilge water, and smoke from the refineries on the city’s outer islands had
smeared the night sky in a briny haze.
The full moon looked less like a jewel than a yellowy blister in need of
lancing.
Maybe he could compliment Anya’s laugh? Except he’d never heard her
laugh. He wasn’t very good with jokes.
Joost glanced at his reflection in one of the glass panels set into the double
doors that led from the house to the side garden. His mother was right. Even
in his new uniform, he still looked like a baby.
Gently, he brushed his finger along his upper lip. If only his moustache
would come in. It definitely felt thicker than yesterday.
He’d been a guard in the stadwatch less than six weeks, and it wasn’t nearly
as exciting as he’d hoped. He thought he’d be running down thieves in the
Barrel or patrolling the harbours, getting first look at cargo coming in on the
docks. But ever since the assassination of that ambassador at the town hall,
the Merchant Council had been grumbling about security, so where was he?
Stuck walking in circles at some lucky mercher ’s house. Not just any
mercher, though. Councilman Hoede was about as high placed in Ketterdam
government as a man could be. The kind of man who could make a career.
Joost adjusted the set of his coat and rifle, then patted the weighted baton at
his hip. Maybe Hoede would take a liking to him. Sharp eyed and quick
with the cudgel, Hoede would say. That fellow deserves a promotion.
“Sergeant JoostVan Poel,” he whispered, savouring the sound of the words.
“Captain JoostVan Poel.”
“Stop gawking at yourself.”
Joost whirled, cheeks going hot as Henk and Rutger strode into the side
garden. They were both older, bigger, and broader of shoulder than Joost,
and they were house guards, private servants of Councilman Hoede. That
meant they wore his pale green livery, carried fancy rifles from Novyi Zem,
and never let Joost forget he was a lowly grunt from the city watch.
“Petting that bit of fuzz isn’t going to make it grow any faster,” Rutger said
with a loud laugh.
Joost tried to summon some dignity. “I need to finish my rounds.”
Rutger elbowed Henk. “That means he’s going to go stick his head in the
Grisha workshop to get a look at his girl.”
“Oh, Anya, won’t you use your Grisha magic to make my moustache grow?
” Henk mocked.
Joost turned on his heel, cheeks burning, and strode down the eastern side
of the house. They’d been teasing him ever since he’d arrived. If it hadn’t
been for Anya, he probably would have pleaded with his captain for a
reassignment. He and Anya only ever exchanged a few words on his
rounds, but she was always the best part of his night.
And he had to admit, he liked Hoede’s house, too, the few peeks he’d
managed through the windows. Hoede had one of the grandest mansions on
the Geldstraat – floors set with gleaming squares of black and white stone,
shining dark wood walls lit by blown-glass chandeliers that floated like
jellyfish near the coffered ceilings. Sometimes Joost liked to pretend that it
was his house, that he was a rich mercher just out for a stroll through his
fine garden.
Before he rounded the corner, Joost took a deep breath. Anya, your eyes are
brown like … tree bark? He’d think of something. He was better off being
spontaneous anyway.
He was surprised to see the glass-panelled doors to the Grisha workshop
open. More than the hand-painted blue tiles in the kitchen or the mantels
laden with potted tulips, this workshop was a testimony to Hoede’s wealth.
Grisha indentures didn’t come cheap, and Hoede had three of them.
But Yuri wasn’t seated at the long worktable, and Anya was nowhere to be
seen. Only Retvenko was there, sprawled out on a chair in dark blue robes,
eyes shut, a book open on his chest.
Joost hovered in the doorway, then cleared his throat. “These doors should
be shut and locked at night.”
“House is like furnace,” Retvenko drawled without opening his eyes, his
Ravkan accent thick and rolling. “Tell Hoede I stop sweating, I close
doors.”
Retvenko was a Squaller, older than the other Grisha indentures, his hair
shot through with silver.
There were rumours he’d fought for the losing side in Ravka’s civil war and
had fled to Kerch after the fighting.
“I’d be happy to present your complaints to Councilman Hoede,” Joost lied.
The house was always overheated, as if Hoede were under obligation to
burn coal, but Joost wasn’t going to be the one to mention it. “Until then—”
“You bring news of Yuri?” Retvenko interrupted, finally opening his
heavily hooded eyes.
Joost glanced uneasily at the bowls of red grapes and heaps of burgundy
velvet on the worktable.
Yuri had been working on bleeding colour from the fruit into curtains for
Mistress Hoede, but he’d fallen badly ill a few days ago, and Joost hadn’t
seen him since. Dust had begun to gather on the velvet, and the grapes were
going bad.
“I haven’t heard anything.”
“Of course you hear nothing. Too busy strutting around in stupid purple
uniform.”
What was wrong with his uniform? And why did Retvenko even have to be
here? He was Hoede’s
personal Squaller and often travelled with the merchant’s most precious
cargos, guaranteeing favourable winds to bring the ships safely and quickly
to harbour. Why couldn’t he be away at sea now?
“I think Yuri may be quarantined.”
“So helpful,” Retvenko said with a sneer. “You can stop craning neck like
hopeful goose,” he added. “Anya is gone.”
Joost felt his face heat again. “Where is she?” he asked, trying to sound
authoritative. “She should be in after dark.”
“One hour ago, Hoede takes her. Same as night he came for Yuri.”
“What do you mean, ‘he came for Yuri’? Yuri fell ill.”
“Hoede comes for Yuri, Yuri comes back sick. Two days later, Yuri vanishes
for good. Now Anya.”
For good?
“Maybe there was an emergency. If someone needed to be healed—”
“First Yuri, now Anya. I will be next, and no one will notice except poor
little Officer Joost. Go now.”
“If Councilman Hoede—”
Retvenko raised an arm and a gust of air slammed Joost backwards. Joost
scrambled to keep his
footing, grabbing for the doorframe.
“I said now.” Retvenko etched a circle in the air, and the door slammed
shut. Joost let go just in time to avoid having his fingers smashed, and
toppled into the side garden.
He got to his feet as quickly as he could, wiping muck from his uniform,
shame squirming in his belly. One of the glass panes in the door had
cracked from the force. Through it, he saw the Squaller smirking.
“That’s counting against your indenture,” Joost said, pointing to the ruined
pane. He hated how small and petty his voice sounded.
Retvenko waved his hand, and the doors trembled on their hinges. Without
meaning to, Joost took a step back.
“Go and make your rounds, little watchdog,” Retvenko called.
“That went well,” snickered Rutger, leaning against the garden wall.
How long had he been standing there? “Don’t you have something better to
do than follow me around?” Joost asked.
“All guards are to report to the boathouse. Even you. Or are you too busy
making friends?”
“I was asking him to shut the door.”
Rutger shook his head. “You don’t ask. You tell. They’re servants. Not
honoured guests.”
Joost fell into step beside him, insides still churning with humiliation. The
worst part was that Rutger was right. Retvenko had no business talking to
him that way. But what was Joost supposed to do? Even if he’d had the
courage to get into a fight with a Squaller, it would be like brawling with an
expensive vase. The Grisha weren’t just servants; they were Hoede’s
treasured possessions.
What had Retvenko meant about Yuri and Anya being taken anyway? Had
he been covering for Anya? Grisha indentures were kept to the house for
good reason. To walk the streets without protection was to risk getting
plucked up by a slaver and never seen again. Maybe she’s meeting someone,
Joost speculated miserably.
His thoughts were interrupted by the blaze of light and activity down by the
boathouse that faced the canal. Across the water he could see other fine
mercher houses, tall and slender, the tidy gables of their rooftops making a
dark silhouette against the night sky, their gardens and boathouses lit by
glowing lanterns.
A few weeks before, Joost had been told that Hoede’s boathouse would be
undergoing improvements and to strike it from his rounds. But when he and
Rutger entered, he saw no paint or scaffolding. The gondels and oars had
been pushed up against the walls. The other house guards were there in
their sea-green livery, and Joost recognised two stadwatch guards in purple.
But most of the interior was taken up by a huge box – a kind of freestanding
cell that looked as if it was made from reinforced steel, its seams thick with
rivets, a huge window embedded in one of its walls. The glass had a wavy
bent, and through it, Joost could see a girl seated at a table, clutching her
red silks tight around her. Behind her, a stadwatch guard stood at attention.
Anya, Joost realised with a start. Her brown eyes were wide and frightened,
her skin pale. The little boy sitting across from her looked doubly terrified.
His hair was sleep-tousled and his legs dangled from the chair, kicking
nervously at the air.
“Why all the guards?” asked Joost. There had to be more than ten of them
crowded into the boathouse. Councilman Hoede was there, too, along with
another merchant Joost didn’t know, both of them dressed in mercher black.
Joost stood up straighter when he saw they were talking to the captain of
the stadwatch. He hoped he’d got all the garden mud off his uniform.
“What is this?”
Rutger shrugged. “Who cares? It’s a break in the routine.” Joost looked
back through the glass.
Anya was staring out at him, her gaze unfocused. The day he’d arrived at
Hoede house, she’d healed a bruise on his cheek. It had been nothing, the
yellow-green remnants of a crack he’d taken to the face during a training
exercise, but apparently Hoede had caught sight of it and didn’t like his
guards looking like thugs. Joost had been sent to the Grisha workshop, and
Anya had sat him down in a bright square of late winter sunlight. Her cool
fingers had passed over his skin, and though the itch had been terrible, bare
seconds later it was as if the bruise had never been.
When Joost thanked her, Anya had smiled and Joost was lost. He knew his
cause was hopeless.
Even if she’d had any interest in him, he could never afford to buy her
indenture from Hoede, and she would never marry unless Hoede decreed it.
But it hadn’t stopped him from dropping by to say hello or to bring her little
gifts. She’d liked the map of Kerch best, a whimsical drawing of their
island nation, surrounded by mermaids swimming in the True Sea and ships
blown along by winds depicted as fat-cheeked men. It was a cheap
souvenir, the kind tourists bought along East Stave, but it had seemed to
please her.
Now he risked raising a hand in greeting. Anya showed no reaction.
“She can’t see you, moron,” laughed Rutger. “The glass is mirrored on the
other side.”
Joost’s cheeks pinked. “How was I to know that?”
“Open your eyes and pay attention for once.”
First Yuri, now Anya. “Why do they need a Grisha Healer? Is that boy
injured?”
“He looks fine to me.”
The captain and Hoede seemed to reach some kind of agreement.
Through the glass, Joost saw Hoede enter the cell and give the boy an
encouraging pat. There must have been vents in the cell because he heard
Hoede say, “Be a brave lad, and there’s a few kruge in it for you.” Then he
grabbed Anya’s chin with a liver-spotted hand. She tensed, and Joost’s gut
tightened. Hoede gave Anya’s head a little shake. “Do as you’re told, and
this will soon be over, ja?”
She gave a small, tight smile. “Of course, Onkle.”
Hoede whispered a few words to the guard behind Anya, then stepped out.
The door shut with a loud clang, and Hoede slid a heavy lock into place.
Hoede and the other merchant took positions almost directly in front of
Joost and Rutger.
The merchant Joost didn’t know said, “You’re sure this is wise? This girl is
a Corporalnik. After what happened to your Fabrikator—”
“If it was Retvenko, I’d be worried. But Anya has a sweet disposition. She’s
a Healer. Not prone to aggression.”
“And you’ve lowered the dose?”
“Yes, but we’re agreed that if we have the same results as the Fabrikator,
the Council will compensate me? I can’t be asked to bear that expense.”
When the merchant nodded, Hoede signalled to the captain. “Proceed.”
The same results as the Fabrikator. Retvenko claimed Yuri had vanished.
Was that what he’d meant?
“Sergeant,” said the captain, “are you ready?”
The guard inside the cell replied, “Yes, sir.” He drew a knife.
Joost swallowed hard.
“First test,” said the captain.
The guard bent forwards and told the boy to roll up his sleeve. The boy
obeyed and stuck out his arm, popping the thumb of his other hand into his
mouth. Too old for that, thought Joost. But the boy must be very scared.
Joost had slept with a sock bear until he was nearly fourteen, a fact his older
brothers had mocked mercilessly.
“This will sting just a bit,” said the guard.
The boy kept his thumb in his mouth and nodded, eyes round.
“This really isn’t necessary—” said Anya.
“Quiet, please,” said Hoede.
The guard gave the boy a pat then slashed a bright red cut across his
forearm. The boy started crying immediately.
Anya tried to rise from her chair, but the guard placed a stern hand on her
shoulder.
“It’s alright, sergeant,” said Hoede. “Let her heal him.”
Anya leaned forwards, taking the boy’s hand gently. “Shhhh,” she said
softly. “Let me help.”
“Will it hurt?” the boy gulped.
She smiled. “Not at all. Just a little itch. Try to hold still for me?”
Joost found himself leaning closer. He’d never actually seen Anya heal
someone.
Anya removed a handkerchief from her sleeve and wiped away the excess
blood. Then her fingers
brushed carefully over the boy’s wound. Joost watched in astonishment as
the skin slowly seemed to re-form and knit together.
A few minutes later, the boy grinned and held out his arm. It looked a bit
red, but was otherwise smooth and unmarked. “Was that magic?”
Anya tapped him on the nose. “Of a sort. The same magic your own body
works when given time
and a bit of bandage.”
The boy looked almost disappointed.
“Good, good,” Hoede said impatiently. “Now the parem.”
Joost frowned. He’d never heard that word.
The captain signalled to his sergeant. “Second sequence.”
“Put out your arm,” the sergeant said to the boy once again.
The boy shook his head. “I don’t like that part.”
“Do it.”
The boy’s lower lip quivered, but he put out his arm. The guard cut him
once more. Then he placed a small wax paper envelope on the table in front
of Anya.
“Swallow the contents of the packet,” Hoede instructed Anya.
“What is it?” she asked, voice trembling.
“That isn’t your concern.”
“What is it? ” she repeated.
“It’s not going to kill you. We’re going to ask you to perform some simple
tasks to judge the drug’s effects. The sergeant is there to make sure you do
only what you’re told and no more, understood?”
Her jaw set, but she nodded.
“No one will harm you,” said Hoede. “But remember, if you hurt the
sergeant, you have no way
out of that cell. The doors are locked from the outside.”
“What is that stuff?” whispered Joost.
“Don’t know,” said Rutger.
“What do you know?” he muttered.
“Enough to keep my trap shut.”
Joost scowled.
With shaking hands, Anya lifted the little wax envelope and opened the
flap.
“Go on,” said Hoede.
She tipped her head back and swallowed the powder. For a moment she sat,
waiting, lips pressed together.
“Is it just jurda?” she asked hopefully. Joost found himself hoping, too.
Jurda was nothing to fear, a stimulant everyone in the stadwatch chewed to
stay awake on late watches.
“What does it taste like?” Hoede asked.
“Like jurda but sweeter, it—”
Anya inhaled sharply. Her hands seized the table, her pupils dilating enough
that her eyes looked nearly black. “Ohhh,” she said, sighing. It was nearly a
purr.
The guard tightened his grip on her shoulder.
“How do you feel?”
She stared at the mirror and smiled. Her tongue peeked through her white
teeth, stained like rust.
Joost felt suddenly cold.
“Just as it was with the Fabrikator,” murmured the merchant.
“Heal the boy,” Hoede commanded.
She waved her hand through the air, the gesture almost dismissive, and the
cut on the boy’s arm sealed instantly. The blood lifted briefly from his skin
in droplets of red then vanished. His skin looked perfectly smooth, all trace
of blood or redness gone. The boy beamed. “That was definitely magic.”
“It feels like magic,” Anya said with that same eerie smile.
“She didn’t touch him,” marvelled the captain.
“Anya,” said Hoede. “Listen closely. We’re going to tell the guard to
perform the next test now.”
“Mmm,” hummed Anya.
“Sergeant,” said Hoede. “Cut off the boy’s thumb.”
The boy howled and started to cry again. He shoved his hands beneath his
legs to protect them.
I should stop this, Joost thought. I should find a way to protect her, both of
them. But what then? He was a nobody, new to the stadwatch, new to this
house. Besides, he discovered in a burst of shame, I want to keep my job.
Anya merely smiled and tilted her head back so she was looking at the
sergeant. “Shoot the glass.”
“What did she say?” asked the merchant.
“Sergeant!” the captain barked out.
“Shoot the glass,” Anya repeated. The sergeant’s face went slack. He
cocked his head to one side as if listening to a distant melody, then unslung
his rifle and aimed at the observation window.
“Get down!” someone yelled.
Joost threw himself to the ground, covering his head as the rapid hammer of
gunfire filled his ears and bits of glass rained down on his hands and back.
His thoughts were a panicked clamour. His mind tried to deny it, but he
knew what he’d just seen. Anya had commanded the sergeant to shoot the
glass.
She’d made him do it. But that couldn’t be. Grisha Corporalki specialised in
the human body. They could stop your heart, slow your breathing, snap
your bones. They couldn’t get inside your head.
For a moment there was silence. Then Joost was on his feet with everyone
else, reaching for his rifle. Hoede and the captain shouted at the same time.
“Subdue her!”
“Shoot her!”
“Do you know how much money she’s worth?” Hoede retorted. “Someone
restrain her! Do not shoot!”
Anya raised her hands, red sleeves spread wide. “Wait,” she said.
Joost’s panic vanished. He knew he’d been frightened, but his fear was a
distant thing. He was filled with expectation. He wasn’t sure what was
coming, or when, only that it would arrive and that it was essential he be
ready to meet it. It might be bad or good. He didn’t really care. His heart
was free of worry and desire. He longed for nothing, wanted for nothing,
his mind silent, his breath steady. He only needed to wait.
He saw Anya rise and pick up the little boy. He heard her crooning tenderly
to him, some Ravkan lullaby.
“Open the door and come in, Hoede,” she said. Joost heard the words,
understood them, forgot them.
Hoede walked to the door and slid the bolt free. He entered the steel cell.
“Do as you’re told, and this will soon be over, ja?” Anya murmured with a
smile. Her eyes were black and bottomless pools. Her skin was alight,
glowing, incandescent. A thought flickered through Joost’s mind – beautiful
as the moon.
Anya shifted the boy’s weight in her arms. “Don’t look,” she murmured
against his hair. “Now,”
she said to Hoede. “Pick up the knife.”
Kaz Brekker didn’t need a reason. Those were the words whispered on the
streets of Ketterdam, in the taverns and coffeehouses, in the dark and
bleeding alleys of the pleasure district known as the Barrel. The boy they
called Dirtyhands didn’t need a reason any more than he needed permission
– to break a leg, sever an alliance, or change a man’s fortunes with the turn
of a card.
Of course they were wrong, Inej considered as she crossed the bridge over
the black waters of the Beurscanal to the deserted main square that fronted
the Exchange. Every act of violence was deliberate, and every favour came
with enough strings attached to stage a puppet show. Kaz always had his
reasons. Inej could just never be sure they were good ones. Especially
tonight.
Inej checked her knives, silently reciting their names as she always did
when she thought there might be trouble. It was a practical habit, but a
comfort, too. The blades were her companions. She liked knowing they
were ready for whatever the night might bring.
She saw Kaz and the others gathered near the great stone arch that marked
the eastern entrance to the Exchange. Three words had been carved into the
rock above them: Enjent, Voorhent, Almhent.
Industry, Integrity, Prosperity.
She kept close to the shuttered shop fronts that lined the square, avoiding
the pockets of flickering gaslight cast by the streetlamps. As she moved, she
inventoried the crew Kaz had brought with him: Dirix, Rotty, Muzzen and
Keeg, Anika and Pim, and his chosen seconds for tonight’s parley, Jesper
and Big Bolliger. They jostled and bumped each other, laughing, stamping
their feet against the cold snap that had surprised the city this week, the last
gasp of winter before spring began in earnest. They were all bruisers and
brawlers, culled from the younger members of the Dregs, the people Kaz
trusted most. Inej noted the glint of knives tucked into their belts, lead
pipes, weighted chains, axe handles studded with rusty nails, and here and
there, the oily gleam of a gun barrel. She slipped silently into their ranks,
scanning the shadows near the Exchange for signs of Black Tip spies.
“Three ships!” Jesper was saying. “The Shu sent them. They were just
sitting in First Harbour, cannons out, red flags flying, stuffed to the sails
with gold.”
Big Bolliger gave a low whistle. “Would have liked to see that.”
“Would have liked to steal that,” replied Jesper. “Half the Merchant Council
was down there flapping and squawking, trying to figure out what to do.”
“Don’t they want the Shu paying their debts?” Big Bolliger asked.
Kaz shook his head, dark hair glinting in the lamplight. He was a collection
of hard lines and tailored edges – sharp jaw, lean build, wool coat snug
across his shoulders. “Yes and no,” he said in his rocksalt rasp. “It’s always
good to have a country in debt to you. Makes for friendlier negotiations.”
“Maybe the Shu are done being friendly,” said Jesper. “They didn’t have to
send all that treasure at once. You think they stuck that trade ambassador?”
Kaz’s eyes found Inej unerringly in the crowd. Ketterdam had been buzzing
about the assassination of the ambassador for weeks. It had nearly
destroyed Kerch-Zemeni relations and sent the Merchant Council into an
uproar. The Zemeni blamed the Kerch. The Kerch suspected the Shu. Kaz
didn’t care who was responsible; the murder fascinated him because he
couldn’t figure out how it had been accomplished. In one of the busiest
corridors of the Stadhall, in full view of more than a dozen government
officials, the Zemeni trade ambassador had stepped into a washroom. No
one else had entered or left, but when his aide knocked on the door a few
minutes later, there had been no answer.
When they’d broken down the door, they’d found the ambassador facedown
on the white tiles, a knife in his back, the taps still running.
Kaz had sent Inej to investigate the premises after hours. The washroom
had no other entrance, no windows or vents, and even Inej hadn’t mastered
the art of squeezing herself through the plumbing.
Yet the Zemeni ambassador was dead. Kaz hated a puzzle he couldn’t solve,
and he and Inej had concocted a hundred theories to account for the murder
– none of which satisfied. But they had more pressing problems tonight.
She saw him signal to Jesper and Big Bolliger to divest themselves of
weapons. Street law dictated that for a parley of this kind each lieutenant be
seconded by two of his foot soldiers and that they all be unarmed. Parley.
The word felt like a deception – strangely prim, an antique. No matter what
street law decreed, this night smelled like violence.
“Go on, give those guns over,” Dirix said to Jesper.
With a great sigh, Jesper removed the gunbelts at his hips. She had to admit
he looked less himself without them. The Zemeni sharpshooter was longlimbed, brown-skinned, constantly in motion. He pressed his lips to the
pearl handles of his prized revolvers, bestowing each with a mournful kiss.
“Take good care of my babies,” Jesper said as he handed them over to
Dirix. “If I see a single scratch or nick on those, I’ll spell forgive me on
your chest in bullet holes.”
“You wouldn’t waste the ammo.”
“And he’d be dead halfway through forgive,” Big Bolliger said as he
dropped a hatchet, a switchblade, and his preferred weapon – a thick chain
weighted with a heavy padlock – into Rotty’s expectant hands.
Jesper rolled his eyes. “It’s about sending a message. What’s the point of a
dead guy with forg written on his chest?”
“Compromise,” Kaz said. “I’m sorry does the trick and uses fewer bullets.”
Dirix laughed, but Inej noted that he cradled Jesper ’s revolvers very gently.
“What about that?” Jesper asked, gesturing to Kaz’s walking stick.
Kaz’s laugh was low and humourless. “Who’d deny a poor cripple his
cane?”
“If the cripple is you, then any man with sense.”
“Then it’s a good thing we’re meeting Geels.” Kaz drew a watch from his
vest pocket. “It’s almost midnight.”
Inej turned her gaze to the Exchange. It was little more than a large
rectangular courtyard surrounded by warehouses and shipping offices. But
during the day, it was the heart of Ketterdam, bustling with wealthy
merchers buying and selling shares in the trade voyages that passed through
the city’s ports. Now it was nearly twelve bells, and the Exchange was
deserted but for the guards who patrolled the perimeter and the rooftop.
They’d been bribed to look the other way during tonight’s parley.
The Exchange was one of the few remaining parts of the city that hadn’t
been divvied up and claimed in the ceaseless skirmishes between
Ketterdam’s rival gangs. It was supposed to be neutral territory. But it didn’t
feel neutral to Inej. It felt like the hush of the woods before the snare yanks
tight and the rabbit starts to scream. It felt like a trap.
“This is a mistake,” she said. Big Bolliger started; he hadn’t known she was
standing there. Inej heard the name the Dregs preferred for her whispered
among their ranks – the Wraith. “Geels is up to something.”
“Of course he is,” said Kaz. His voice had the rough, abraded texture of
stone against stone. Inej always wondered if he’d sounded that way as a
little boy. If he’d ever been a little boy.
“Then why come here tonight?”
“Because this is the way Per Haskell wants it.”
Old man, old ways, Inej thought but didn’t say, and she suspected the other
Dregs were thinking the same thing.
“He’s going to get us all killed,” she said.
Jesper stretched his long arms overhead and grinned, his teeth white against
his dark skin. He had yet to give up his rifle, and the silhouette of it across
his back made him resemble a gawky, long-limbed bird. “Statistically, he’ll
probably only get some of us killed.”
“It’s not something to joke about,” she replied. The look Kaz cast her was
amused. She knew how she sounded – stern, fussy, like an old crone
making dire pronouncements from her porch. She didn’t like it, but she also
knew she was right. Besides, old women must know something, or they
wouldn’t live to gather wrinkles and yell from their front steps.
“Jesper isn’t making a joke, Inej,” said Kaz. “He’s figuring the odds.”
Big Bolliger cracked his huge knuckles. “Well, I’ve got lager and a skillet
of eggs waiting for me at the Kooperom, so I can’t be the one to die
tonight.”
“Care to place a wager?” Jesper asked.
“I’m not going to bet on my own death.”
Kaz flipped his hat onto his head and ran his gloved fingers along the brim
in a quick salute. “Why not, Bolliger? We do it every day.”
He was right. Inej’s debt to Per Haskell meant she gambled her life every
time she took on a new job or assignment, every time she left her room at
the Slat. Tonight was no different.
Kaz struck his walking stick against the cobblestones as the bells from the
Church of Barter began to chime. The group fell silent. The time for talk
was done. “Geels isn’t smart, but he’s just bright enough to be trouble,” said
Kaz. “No matter what you hear, you don’t join the fray unless I give the
command. Stay sharp.” Then he gave Inej a brief nod. “And stay hidden.”
“No mourners,” Jesper said as he tossed his rifle to Rotty.
“No funerals,” the rest of the Dregs murmured in reply. Among them, it
passed for ‘good luck’.
Before Inej could melt into the shadows, Kaz tapped her arm with his
crow’s head cane. “Keep a watch on the rooftop guards. Geels may have
them in his pocket.”
“Then—” Inej began, but Kaz was already gone.
Inej threw up her hands in frustration. She had a hundred questions, but as
usual, Kaz was keeping a stranglehold on the answers.
She jogged towards the canal-facing wall of the Exchange. Only the
lieutenants and their seconds were allowed to enter during the parley. But
just in case the Black Tips got any ideas, the other Dregs would be waiting
right outside the eastern arch with weapons at the ready. She knew Geels
would have his crew of heavily armed Black Tips gathered at the western
entrance.
Inej would find her own way in. The rules of fair play among the gangs
were from Per Haskell’s time. Besides, she was the Wraith – the only law
that applied to her was gravity, and some days she defied that, too.
The lower level of the Exchange was dedicated to windowless warehouses,
so Inej located a drainpipe to shin up. Something made her hesitate before
she wrapped her hand around it. She drew a bonelight from her pocket and
gave it a shake, casting a pale green glow over the pipe. It was slick with
oil. She followed the wall, seeking another option, and found a stone
cornice bearing a statue of Kerch’s three flying fishes within reach. She
stood on her toes and tentatively felt along the top of the cornice. It had
been covered in ground glass. I am expected, she thought with grim
pleasure.
She’d joined up with the Dregs less than two years ago, just days after her
fifteenth birthday. It had been a matter of survival, but it gratified her to
know that, in such a short time, she’d become someone to take precautions
against. Though, if the Black Tips thought tricks like this would keep the
Wraith from her goal, they were sadly mistaken.
She drew two climbing spikes from the pockets of her quilted vest and
wedged first one then the other between the bricks of the wall as she hoisted
herself higher, her questing feet finding the smallest holds and ridges in the
stone. As a child learning the highwire, she’d gone barefoot. But the streets
of Ketterdam were too cold and wet for that. After a few bad spills, she’d
paid a Grisha Fabrikator working in secret out of a gin shop on the
Wijnstraat to make her a pair of leather slippers with nubbly rubber soles.
They were perfectly fitted to her feet and gripped any surface with surety.
On the second story of the Exchange, she hoisted herself onto a window
ledge just wide enough to perch on.
Kaz had done his best to teach her, but she didn’t quite have his way with
breaking and entering, and it took her a few tries to finesse the lock. Finally
she heard a satisfying click, and the window swung open on a deserted
office, its walls covered in maps marked with trade routes, and chalkboards
listing share prices and the names of ships. She ducked inside, refastened
the latch, and picked her way past the empty desks with their neat stacks of
orders and tallies.
She crossed to a slender set of doors and stepped onto a balcony that
overlooked the central courtyard of the Exchange. Each of the shipping
offices had one. From here, callers announced new voyages and arrivals of
inventory, or hung the black flag that indicated that a ship had been lost at
sea with all its cargo. The floor of the Exchange would erupt into a flurry of
trades, runners would spread the word throughout the city, and the price of
goods, futures, and shares in outgoing voyages would rise or fall. But
tonight all was silence.
A wind came in off the harbour, bringing the smell of the sea, ruffling the
stray hairs that had escaped the braided coil at the nape of Inej’s neck.
Down in the square, she saw the sway of lamplight and heard the thump of
Kaz’s cane on the stones as he and his seconds made their way across the
square. On the opposite side, she glimpsed another set of lanterns heading
towards them. The Black Tips had arrived.
Inej raised her hood. She pulled herself onto the railing and leaped
soundlessly to the neighbouring balcony, then the next, tracking Kaz and
the others around the square, staying as close as she could. His dark coat
rippled in the salt breeze, his limp more pronounced tonight, as it always
was when the weather turned cold. She could hear Jesper keeping up a
lively stream of conversation, and Big Bolliger ’s low, rumbling chuckle.
As she drew nearer to the other side of the square, Inej saw that Geels had
chosen to bring Elzinger and Oomen – exactly as she had predicted. Inej
knew the strengths and weaknesses of every member of the Black Tips, not
to mention Harley’s Pointers, the Liddies, the Razorgulls, the Dime Lions,
and every other gang working the streets of Ketterdam. It was her job to
know that Geels trusted Elzinger because they’d come up through the ranks
of the Black Tips together, and because Elzinger was built like a stack of
boulders – nearly seven feet tall, dense with muscle, his wide, mashed-in
face jammed low on a neck thick as a pylon.
She was suddenly glad Big Bolliger was with Kaz. That Kaz had chosen
Jesper to be one of his seconds was no surprise. Twitchy as Jesper was, with
or without his revolvers, he was at his best in a fight, and she knew he’d do
anything for Kaz. She’d been less sure when Kaz had insisted on Big
Bolliger as well. Big Bol was a bouncer at the Crow Club, perfectly suited
to tossing out drunks and wasters, but too heavy on his feet to be much use
when it came to a real tussle. Still, at least he was tall enough to look
Elzinger in the eye.
Inej didn’t want to think too much on Geels’ other second. Oomen made her
nervous. He wasn’t as physically intimidating as Elzinger. In fact, Oomen
was made like a scarecrow – not scrawny, but as if beneath his clothes, his
body had been put together at wrong angles. Word was he’d once crushed a
man’s skull with his bare hands, wiped his palms clean on his shirtfront, and
kept right on drinking.
Inej tried to quiet the unease roiling through her, and listened as Geels and
Kaz made small talk in the square while their seconds patted each of them
down to make sure no one was carrying.
“Naughty,” Jesper said as he removed a tiny knife from Elzinger ’s sleeve
and tossed it across the square.
“Clear,” declared Big Bolliger as he finished patting down Geels and
moved on to Oomen.
Kaz and Geels discussed the weather, the suspicion that the Kooperom was
serving watered-down
drinks now that the rent had been raised – dancing around the real reason
they’d come here tonight. In theory, they would chat, make their apologies,
agree to respect the boundaries of Fifth Harbour, then all head out to find a
drink together – at least that’s what Per Haskell had insisted.
But what does Per Haskell know? Inej thought as she looked for the guards
patrolling the roof above, trying to pick out their shapes in the dark. Haskell
ran the Dregs, but these days, he preferred to sit in the warmth of his room,
drinking lukewarm lager, building model ships, and telling long stories of
his exploits to anyone who would listen. He seemed to think territory wars
could be settled as they once had been: with a short scuffle and a friendly
handshake. But every one of Inej’s senses told her that was not how this
was going to play out. Her father would have said the shadows were about
their own business tonight. Something bad was going to happen here.
Kaz stood with both gloved hands resting on the carved crow’s head of his
cane. He looked totally at ease, his narrow face obscured by the brim of his
hat. Most gang members in the Barrel loved flash: gaudy waistcoats, watch
fobs studded with false gems, trousers in every print and pattern
imaginable. Kaz was the exception – the picture of restraint, his dark vests
and trousers simply cut and tailored along severe lines. At first, she’d
thought it was a matter of taste, but she’d come to understand that it was a
joke he played on the upstanding merchers. He enjoyed looking like one of
them.
“I’m a business man,” he’d told her. “No more, no less.”
“You’re a thief, Kaz.”
“Isn’t that what I just said?”
Now he looked like some kind of priest come to preach to a group of circus
performers. A young priest, she thought with another pang of unease. Kaz
had called Geels old and washed up, but he certainly didn’t seem that way
tonight. The Black Tips’ lieutenant might have wrinkles creasing the
corners of his eyes and burgeoning jowls beneath his sideburns, but he
looked confident, experienced. Next to him Kaz looked … well, seventeen.
“Let’s be fair, ja? All we want is a bit more scrub,” Geels said, tapping the
mirrored buttons of his lime-green waistcoat. “It’s not fair for you to cull
every spend-happy tourist stepping off a pleasure boat at Fifth Harbour.”
“Fifth Harbour is ours, Geels,” Kaz replied. “The Dregs get first crack at
the pigeons who come looking for a little fun.”
Geels shook his head. “You’re a young one, Brekker,” he said with an
indulgent laugh. “Maybe you don’t understand how these things work. The
harbours belong to the city, and we have as much right to them as anyone.
We’ve all got a living to make.”
Technically, that was true. But Fifth Harbour had been useless and all but
abandoned by the city when Kaz had taken it over. He’d had it dredged, and
then built out the docks and the quay, and he’d had to mortgage the Crow
Club to do it. Per Haskell had railed at him and called him a fool for the
expense, but eventually he’d relented. According to Kaz, the old man’s
exact words had been, “Take all that rope and hang yourself.” But the
endeavour had paid for itself in less than a year. Now Fifth Harbour offered
berths to mercher ships, as well as boats from all over the world carrying
tourists and soldiers eager to see the sights and sample the pleasures of
Ketterdam. The Dregs got first try at all of them, steering them – and their
wallets – into brothels, taverns, and gambling dens owned by the gang.
Fifth Harbour had made the old man very rich, and cemented the Dregs as
real players in the Barrel in a way that not even the success of the Crow
Club had. But with profit came unwanted attention. Geels and the Black
Tips had been making trouble for the Dregs all year, encroaching on Fifth
Harbour, picking off pigeons that weren’t rightfully theirs.
“Fifth Harbour is ours,” Kaz repeated. “It isn’t up for negotiation. You’re
cutting into our traffic from the docks, and you intercepted a shipment of
jurda that should have docked two nights ago.”
“Don’t know what you’re talking about.”
“I know it comes easy, Geels, but try not to play dumb with me.”
Geels took a step forwards. Jesper and Big Bolliger tensed.
“Quit flexing, boy,” Geels said. “We all know the old man doesn’t have the
stomach for a real brawl.”
Kaz’s laugh was dry as the rustle of dead leaves. “But I’m the one at your
table, Geels, and I’m not here for a taste. You want a war, I’ll make sure
you eat your fill.”
“And what if you’re not around, Brekker? Everyone knows you’re the spine
of Haskell’s operation
– snap it and the Dregs collapse.”
Jesper snorted. “Stomach, spine. What’s next, spleen?”
“Shut it,” Oomen snarled. The rules of parley dictated that only the
lieutenants could speak once negotiations had begun. Jesper mouthed
“sorry” and elaborately pantomimed locking his lips shut.
“I’m fairly sure you’re threatening me, Geels,” Kaz said. “But I want to be
certain before I decide what to do about it.”
“Sure of yourself, aren’t you, Brekker?”
“Myself and nothing else.”
Geels burst out laughing and elbowed Oomen. “Listen to this cocky little
piece of crap. Brekker, you don’t own these streets. Kids like you are fleas.
A new crop of you turns up every few years to annoy your betters until a
big dog decides to scratch. And let me tell you, I’m about tired of the itch.”
He crossed his arms, pleasure rolling off him in smug waves. “What if I told
you there are two guards with city-issue rifles pointed at you and your boys
right now?”
Inej’s stomach dropped. Was that what Kaz had meant when he said Geels
might have the guards in his pocket?
Kaz glanced up at the roof. “Hiring city guards to do your killing? I’d say
that’s an expensive proposition for a gang like the Black Tips. I’m not sure I
believe your coffers could support it.”
Inej climbed onto the railing and launched herself from the safety of the
balcony, heading for the roof. If they survived the night, she was going to
kill Kaz.
There were always two guards from the stadwatch posted on the roof of the
Exchange. A few kruge from the Dregs and the Black Tips had ensured they
wouldn’t interfere with the parley, a common enough transaction. But Geels
was implying something very different. Had he really managed to bribe city
guards to play sniper for him? If so, the Dregs’ odds of surviving this night
had just dwindled to a knife’s point.
Like most of the buildings in Ketterdam, the Exchange had a sharply gabled
roof to keep off heavy rain, so the guards patrolled the rooftop via a narrow
walkway that overlooked the courtyard. Inej ignored it. It was easier going
but would leave her too exposed. Instead she scaled halfway up the slick
roof tiles and started crawling, her body tilted at a precarious angle, moving
like a spider as she kept one eye on the guards’ walkway and one ear on the
conversation below. Maybe Geels was bluffing. Or maybe two guards were
hunched over the railing right now with Kaz or Jesper or Big Bolliger in
their sights.
“Took some doing,” Geels admitted. “We’re a small operation right now,
and city guards don’t come cheap. But it’ll be worth it for the prize.”
“That being me?”
“That being you.”
“I’m flattered.”
“The Dregs won’t last a week without you.”
“I’d give them a month on sheer momentum.”
The thought rattled noisily around in Inej’s head. If Kaz was gone, would I
stay? Or would I skip out on my debt? Take my chances with Per Haskell’s
enforcers? If she didn’t move faster, she might well find out.
“Smug little slum rat.” Geels laughed. “I can’t wait to wipe that look off
your face.”
“So do it,” Kaz said. Inej risked a look down. His voice had changed, all
humour gone.
“Should I have them put a bullet in your good leg, Brekker?”
Where are the guards? Inej thought, picking up her pace. She raced across
the steep pitch of the gable. The Exchange stretched nearly the length of a
city block. There was too much territory to cover.
“Stop talking, Geels. Tell them to shoot.”
“Kaz—” said Jesper nervously.
“Go on. Find your balls and give the order.”
What game was Kaz playing? Had he expected this? Had he just assumed
Inej would find her way
to the guards in time?
She glanced down again. Geels radiated anticipation. He took a deep breath,
puffing out his chest.
Inej’s steps faltered, and she had to fight not to go sliding straight off the
edge of the roof. He’s going to do it. I’m going to watch Kaz die.
“Fire!” Geels shouted.
A gunshot split the air. Big Bolliger let loose a cry and crumpled to the
ground.
“Damn it!” shouted Jesper, dropping to one knee beside Bolliger and
pressing his hand to the bullet wound as the big man moaned. “You
worthless podge!” he yelled at Geels. “You just violated neutral territory.”
“Nothing to say you didn’t shoot first,” Geels replied. “And who’s going to
know? None of you
are walking out of here.”
Geels’ voice sounded too high. He was trying to maintain his composure,
but Inej could hear panic pulsing against his words, the startled wingbeat of
a frightened bird. Why? Moments before he’d been all bluster.
That was when Inej saw Kaz still hadn’t moved. “You don’t look well,
Geels.”
“I’m just fine,” he said. But he wasn’t. He looked pale and shaky. His eyes
were darting right and left as if searching the shadowed walkway of the
roof.
“Are you?” Kaz asked conversationally. “Things aren’t going quite as
planned, are they?”
“Kaz,” Jesper said. “Bolliger ’s bleeding bad—”
“Good,” Kaz said ignoring him.
“Kaz, he needs a medik!”
Kaz spared the wounded man the barest glance. “What he needs to do is
stop his bellyaching and be glad I didn’t have Holst take him down with a
headshot.”
Even from above, Inej saw Geels flinch.
“That’s the guard’s name, isn’t it?” Kaz asked. “Willem Holst and Bert Van
Daal – the two city guards on duty tonight. The ones you emptied the Black
Tips’ coffers to bribe?”
Geels said nothing.
“Willem Holst,” Kaz said loudly, his voice floating up to the roof, “likes to
gamble almost as much as Jesper does, so your money held a lot of appeal.
But Holst has much bigger problems – let’s call them urges. I won’t go into
detail. A secret’s not like coin. It doesn’t keep its value in the spending.
You’ll just have to trust me when I say this one would turn even your
stomach. Isn’t that right, Holst?”
The response was another gunshot. It struck the cobblestones near Geels’
feet. Geels released a shocked bleat and sprang back.
This time Inej had a better chance to track the origin of the gunfire. The
shot had come from somewhere near the west side of the building. If Holst
was there, that meant the other guard – Bert Van Daal – would be on the
east side. Had Kaz managed to neutralise him, too? Or was he counting on
her? She sped over the gables.
“Just shoot him, Holst!” Geels bellowed, desperation sawing at his voice.
“Shoot him in the head!”
Kaz snorted in disgust. “Do you really think that secret would die with me?
Go on, Holst,” he called. “Put a bullet in my skull. There will be
messengers sprinting to your wife and your watch captain’s door before I
hit the ground.”
No shot came.
“How?” Geels said bitterly. “How did you even know who would be on
duty tonight? I had to pay
through the gills to get that roster. You couldn’t have outbid me.”
“Let’s say my currency carries more sway.”
“Money is money.”
“I trade in information, Geels, the things men do when they think no one is
looking. Shame holds more value than coin ever can.”
He was grandstanding, Inej saw that, buying her time as she leaped over the
slate shingles.
“Are you worrying about the second guard? Good old Bert Van Daal?” Kaz
asked. “Maybe he’s up
there right now, wondering what he should do. Shoot me? Shoot Holst? Or
maybe I got to him, too, and he’s getting ready to blow a hole in your chest,
Geels.” He leaned in as if he and Geels were sharing a great secret. “Why
not give Van Daal the order and find out?”
Geels opened and closed his mouth like a carp, then bellowed, “Van Daal!”
Just as Van Daal parted his lips to answer, Inej slipped up behind him and
placed a blade to his throat. She’d barely had time to pick out his shadow
and slide down the rooftiles. Saints, Kaz liked to cut it close.
“Shhhh,” she whispered in Van Daal’s ear. She gave him a tiny jab in the
side so that he could feel the point of her second dagger pressed against his
kidney.
“Please,” he moaned. “I—”
“I like it when men beg,” she said. “But this isn’t the time for it.”
Below, she could see Geels’ chest rising and falling with panicked breaths.
“Van Daal!” he shouted again. There was rage on his face when he turned
back to Kaz. “Always one step ahead, aren’t you?”
“Geels, when it comes to you, I’d say I have a running start.”
But Geels just smiled – a tiny smile, tight and satisfied. A victor’s smile,
Inej realised with fresh fear.
“The race isn’t over yet.” Geels reached into his jacket and pulled out a
heavy black pistol.
“Finally,” Kaz said. “The big reveal. Now Jesper can stop keening over
Bolliger like a wet-eyed woman.”
Jesper stared at the gun with stunned, furious eyes. “Bolliger searched him.
He … Oh, Big Bol, you idiot,” he groaned.
Inej couldn’t believe what she was seeing. The guard in her arms released a
tiny squeak. In her anger and surprise, she’d accidentally tightened her grip.
“Relax,” she said, easing her hold. But, all Saints, she wanted to put a knife
through something. Big Bolliger had been the one to pat down Geels.
There was no way he could have missed the pistol. He’d betrayed them.
Was that why Kaz had insisted on bringing Big Bolliger here tonight – so
he’d have public confirmation that Bolliger had gone over to the Black
Tips? It was certainly why he’d let Holst put a bullet in Bolliger ’s gut. But
so what? Now everyone knew Big Bol was a traitor. Kaz still had a gun
pointed at his chest.
Geels smirked. “Kaz Brekker, the great escape artist. How are you going to
wriggle your way out of this one?”
“Going out the same way I came in.” Kaz ignored the pistol, turning his
attention to the big man lying on the ground. “Do you know what your
problem is, Bolliger?” He jabbed at the wound in Big Bol’s stomach with
the tip of his cane. “That wasn’t a rhetorical question. Do you know what
your biggest problem is?”
Bolliger mewled. “Noooo …”
“Give me a guess,” Kaz hissed.
Big Bol said nothing, just released another trembling whimper.
“All right, I’ll tell you. You’re lazy. I know it. Everyone knows it. So I had
to ask myself why my laziest bouncer was getting up early twice a week to
walk two extra miles to Cilla’s Fry for breakfast, especially when the eggs
are so much better at the Kooperom. Big Bol becomes an early riser, the
Black Tips start throwing their weight around Fifth Harbour and then
intercept our biggest shipment of jurda. It wasn’t a tough connection to
make.” He sighed and said to Geels, “This is what happens when stupid
people start making big plans, ja? ”
“Doesn’t matter much now, does it?” replied Geels. “This gets ugly, I’m
shooting from close range. Maybe your guards get me or my guys, but no
way you’re going to dodge this bullet.”
Kaz stepped into the barrel of the gun so that it was pressed directly against
his chest. “No way at all, Geels.”
“You think I won’t do it?”
“Oh, I think you’d do it gladly, with a song in your black heart. But you
won’t. Not tonight.”
Geels’ finger twitched on the trigger.
“Kaz,” Jesper said. “This whole ‘shoot me’ thing is starting to concern me.”
Oomen didn’t bother to object to Jesper mouthing off this time. One man
was down. Neutral territory had been violated. The sharp tang of
gunpowder already hung in the air – and along with it a question, unspoken
in the quiet, as if the Reaper himself awaited the answer: How much blood
will be shed tonight?
In the distance a siren wailed.
“Nineteen Burstraat,” Kaz said.
Geels had been shifting slightly from foot to foot; now he went very still.
“That’s your girl’s address, isn’t it, Geels?”
Geels swallowed. “Don’t have a girl.”
“Oh yes, you do,” crooned Kaz. “She’s pretty, too. Well, pretty enough for a
fink like you. Seems sweet. You love her, don’t you?” Even from the
rooftop, Inej could see the sheen of sweat on Geels’
waxen face. “Of course you do. No one that fine should ever have looked
twice at Barrel scum like you, but she’s different. She finds you charming.
Sure sign of madness if you ask me, but love is strange that way. Does she
like to rest her pretty head on your shoulder? Listen to you talk about your
day?”
Geels looked at Kaz as if he was finally seeing him for the first time. The
boy he’d been talking to had been cocky, reckless, easily amused, but not
frightening – not really. Now the monster was here, dead-eyed and unafraid.
Kaz Brekker was gone, and Dirtyhands had come to see the rough work
done.
“She lives at Nineteen Burstraat,” Kaz said in his gravelly rasp. “Three
floors up, geraniums in the windowboxes. There are two Dregs waiting
outside her door right now, and if I don’t walk out of here whole and feeling
righteous, they will set that place alight from floor to rooftop. It will go up
in seconds, burning from both ends with poor Elise trapped in the middle.
Her blonde hair will catch first. Like the wick of a candle.”
“You’re bluffing,” said Geels, but his pistol hand was trembling.
Kaz lifted his head and inhaled deeply. “Getting late now. You heard the
siren. I smell the harbour on the wind, sea and salt, and maybe – is that
smoke I smell, too?” There was pleasure in his voice.
Oh, Saints, Kaz, Inej thought miserably. What have you done now?
Again, Geels’ finger twitched on the trigger, and Inej tensed.
“I know, Geels. I know,” Kaz said sympathetically. “All that planning and
scheming and bribing for nothing. That’s what you’re thinking right now.
How bad it will feel to walk home knowing what you’ve lost. How angry
your boss is going to be when you show up empty-handed and that much
poorer for it. How satisfying it would be to put a bullet in my heart. You can
do it. Pull the trigger. We can all go down together. They can take our
bodies out to the Reaper ’s Barge for burning, like all paupers go. Or you
can take the blow to your pride, go back to Burstraat, lay your head in your
girl’s lap, fall asleep still breathing, and dream of revenge. It’s up to you,
Geels. Do we get to go home tonight?”
Geels searched Kaz’s gaze, and whatever he saw there made his shoulders
sag. Inej was surprised to feel a pang of pity for him. He’d walked into this
place buoyed on bravado, a survivor, a champion of the Barrel. He’d leave
as another victim of Kaz Brekker.
“You’ll get what’s coming to you some day, Brekker.”
“I will,” said Kaz, “if there’s any justice in the world. And we all know how
likely that is.”
Geels let his arm drop. The pistol hung uselessly by his side.
Kaz stepped back, brushing the front of his shirt where the gun barrel had
rested. “Go and tell your general to keep the Black Tips out of Fifth
Harbour and that we expect him to make amends for the shipment of jurda
we lost, plus five per cent for drawing steel on neutral ground and five per
cent more for being such a spectacular bunch of asses.”
Then Kaz’s cane swung in a sudden sharp arc. Geels screamed as his wrist
bones shattered. The gun clattered to the paving stones.
“I stood down!” cried Geels, cradling his hand. “I stood down!”
“You draw on me again, I’ll break both your wrists, and you’ll have to hire
someone to help you take a piss.” Kaz tipped the brim of his hat up with the
head of his cane. “Or maybe you can get the lovely Elise to do it for you.”
Kaz crouched down beside Bolliger. The big man whimpered. “Look at me,
Bolliger. Assuming you don’t bleed to death tonight, you have until sunset
tomorrow to get out of Ketterdam. I hear you’re anywhere near the city
limits, and they’ll find you stuffed in a keg at Cilla’s Fry.” Then he looked
at Geels. “You help Bolliger, or I find out he’s running with the Black Tips,
don’t think I won’t come after you.”
“Please, Kaz,” moaned Bolliger.
“You had a home, and you put a wrecking ball through the front door,
Bolliger. Don’t look for sympathy from me.” He rose and checked his
pocket watch. “I didn’t expect this to go on so long. I’d best be on my way
or poor Elise will be getting a trifle warm.”
Geels shook his head. “There’s something wrong with you, Brekker. I don’t
know what you are,
but you’re not made right.”
Kaz cocked his head to one side. “You’re from the suburbs, aren’t you,
Geels? Came to the city to try your luck?” He smoothed his lapel with one
gloved hand. “Well, I’m the kind of bastard they only manufacture in the
Barrel.”
Despite the loaded gun at the Black Tips’ feet, Kaz turned his back on them
and limped across the cobblestones towards the eastern arch. Jesper
squatted down next to Bolliger and gave him a gentle pat on the cheek.
“Idiot,” he said sadly, and followed Kaz out of the Exchange.
From the roof, Inej continued to watch as Oomen picked up and holstered
Geels’ gun and the Black Tips said a few quiet words to each other.
“Don’t leave,” Big Bolliger begged. “Don’t leave me.” He tried to cling to
the cuff of Geels’
trousers.
Geels shook him off. They left him curled on his side, leaking blood onto
the cobblestones.
Inej plucked Van Daal’s rifle from his hands before she released him. “Go
home,” she told the guard.
He cast a single terrified glance over his shoulder and sprinted off down the
walkway. Far below, Big Bol had started trying to drag himself across the
floor of the Exchange. He might be stupid enough to cross Kaz Brekker, but
he’d survived this long in the Barrel, and that took will. He might make it.
Help him, a voice inside her said. Until a few moments ago, he’d been her
brother in arms. It seemed wrong to leave him alone. She could go to him,
offer to put him out of his misery quickly, hold his hand as he passed. She
could fetch a medik to save him.
Instead, she spoke a quick prayer in the language of her Saints and began
the steep climb down the outer wall. Inej pitied the boy who might die alone
with no one to comfort him in his last hours or who might live and spend
his life as an exile. But the night’s work wasn’t yet over, and the Wraith
didn’t have time for traitors.
Cheers greeted Kaz as he emerged from the eastern arch, Jesper trailing
behind him and, if Kaz was any judge, already working himself into a sulk.
Dirix, Rotty, and the others charged at them, whooping and shouting, Jesper
’s revolvers held aloft.
The crew had got the barest glimpse of the proceedings with Geels, but
they’d heard most of it. Now they were chanting, “The Burstraat is on fire!
The Dregs don’t have no water!”
“I can’t believe he just turned tail!” jeered Rotty. “He had a loaded pistol in
his hand!”
“Tell us what you had on the guard,” Dirix begged.
“Can’t be the usual stuff.”
“I heard about a guy in Sloken who liked to roll around in apple syrup and
then get two—”
“I’m not talking,” said Kaz. “Holst could prove useful in the future.”
The mood was jittery, and their laughter had the frantic serration that came
with near disaster.
Some of them had expected a fight and were still itching for one. But Kaz
knew there was more to it, and he hadn’t missed the fact that no one had
mentioned Big Bolliger ’s name. They’d been badly shaken by his betrayal
– both the revelation and the way Kaz had delivered punishment. Beneath
all that jostling and whooping, there was fear. Good. Kaz relied on the fact
that the Dregs were all murderers, thieves, and liars. He just had to make
sure they didn’t make a habit of lying to him.
Kaz dispatched two of them to keep an eye on Big Bol and to make sure
that if he made it to his feet, he left the city. The rest could return to the Slat
and the Crow Club to drink off their worry, make some trouble, and spread
word of the night’s events. They’d tell what they’d seen, embroider the rest,
and with every retelling, Dirtyhands would get crazier and more ruthless.
But Kaz had business to attend to, and his first stop would be Fifth Harbour.
Jesper stepped into his path. “You should have let me know about Big
Bolliger,” he said in a furious whisper.
“Don’t tell me my business, Jes.”
“You think I’m dirty, too?”
“If I thought you were dirty, you’d be holding your guts in on the floor of
the Exchange like Big Bol, so stop running your mouth.”
Jesper shook his head and rested his hands on the revolvers he’d reclaimed
from Dirix. Whenever he got cranky, he liked to lay hands on a gun, like a
child seeking the comfort of a favoured doll.
It would have been easy enough to make peace. Kaz could have told Jesper
that he knew he wasn’t dirty, reminded him that he’d trusted him enough to
make him his only real second in a fight that could have gone badly wrong
tonight. Instead, he said, “Go on, Jesper. There’s a line of credit waiting for
you at the Crow Club. Play till morning or your luck runs out, whichever
comes first.”
Jesper scowled, but he couldn’t keep the hungry gleam from his eye.
“Another bribe?”
“I’m a creature of habit.”
“Lucky for you, I am, too.” He hesitated long enough to say, “You don’t
want us with you? Geels’
boys are gonna be riled after that.”
“Let them come,” Kaz said, and turned down Nemstraat without another
word. If you couldn’t walk by yourself through Ketterdam after dark, then
you might as well just hang a sign that read ‘soft’
around your neck and lie down for a beating.
He could feel the Dregs’ eyes on his back as he headed over the bridge. He
didn’t need to hear their whispers to know what they would say. They
wanted to drink with him, hear him explain how he’d known Big Bolliger
had gone over to the Black Tips, listen to him describe the look in Geels’
eyes when he’d dropped his pistol. But they’d never get it from Kaz, and if
they didn’t like it, they could find another crew to run with.
No matter what they thought of him, they’d walk a little taller tonight. It
was why they stayed, why they gave their best approximation of loyalty for
him. When he’d officially become a member of the Dregs, he’d been twelve
and the gang had been a laughing stock, street kids and washed-up cadgers
running shell games and penny-poor cons out of a run-down house in the
worst part of the Barrel. But he hadn’t needed a great gang, just one he
could make great – one that needed him.
Now they had their own territory, their own gambling hall, and that rundown house had become
the Slat, a dry, warm place to get a hot meal or hole up when you were
wounded. Now the Dregs were feared. Kaz had given them that. He didn’t
owe them small talk on top of it.
Besides, Jesper would smoothe it all over. A few drinks in and a few hands
up and the sharpshooter ’s good nature would return. He held a grudge
about as well as he held his liquor, and he had a gift for making Kaz’s
victories sound like they belonged to everyone.
As Kaz headed down one of the little canals that would take him past Fifth
Harbour, he realised he felt – Saints, he almost felt hopeful. Maybe he
should see a medik. The Black Tips had been nipping at his heels for weeks,
and now he’d forced them to play their hand. His leg wasn’t too bad either,
despite the winter chill. The ache was always there, but tonight it was just a
dull throb. Still, a part of him wondered if the parlay was some sort of test
Per Haskell had set for him. Haskell was perfectly capable of convincing
himself that he was the genius making the Dregs prosper, especially if one
of his cronies was whispering in his ear. That idea didn’t sit easy, but Kaz
could worry about Per Haskell tomorrow. For now, he’d make sure
everything was running on schedule at the harbour and then head home to
the Slat for some much-needed sleep.
He knew Inej was shadowing him. She’d been with him all the way from
the Exchange. He didn’t
call out to her. She would make herself visible when she was good and
ready. Usually he liked the quiet; in fact, he would have happily sewn most
people’s lips shut. But when she wanted to, Inej had a way of making you
feel her silence. It tugged at your edges.
Kaz managed to endure it all the way past the iron railings of Zentzbridge,
the grating covered in little bits of rope tied in elaborate knots, sailors’
prayers for safe return from sea. Superstitious rot.
Finally he gave in and said, “Spit it out already, Wraith.”
Her voice came from the dark. “You didn’t send anyone to Burstraat.”
“Why would I?”
“If Geels doesn’t get there in time—”
“No one’s setting fires at Nineteen Burstraat.”
“I heard the siren …”
“A happy accident. I take inspiration where I find it.”
“You were bluffing, then. She was never in danger.”
Kaz shrugged, unwilling to give her an answer. Inej was always trying to
wring little bits of decency from him. “When everyone knows you’re a
monster, you needn’t waste time doing every monstrous thing.”
“Why did you even agree to the meet if you knew it was a set-up?” She was
somewhere to the right of him, moving without a sound. He’d heard other
members of the gang say she moved like a cat, but he suspected cats would
sit attentively at her feet to learn her methods.
“I’d call the night a success,” he said. “Wouldn’t you?”
“You were nearly killed. So was Jesper.”
“Geels emptied the Black Tips’ coffers paying useless bribes. We’ve outed
a traitor, re-established our claim on Fifth Harbour, and I don’t have a
scratch on me. It was a good night.”
“How long have you known about Big Bolliger?”
“Weeks. We’re going to be short-staffed. That reminds me, let Rojakke go.”
“Why? There’s no one like him at the tables.”
“Lots of sobs know their way around a deck of cards. Rojakke is a little too
quick. He’s skimming.”
“He’s a good dealer, and he has a family to provide for. You could give him
a warning, take a finger.”
“Then he wouldn’t be a good dealer any more, would he?”
When a dealer was caught skimming money from a gambling hall, the floor
boss would cut off one of his pinkie fingers. It was one of those ridiculous
punishments that had somehow become codified in the gangs. It threw off
the skimmer ’s balance, forced him to relearn his shuffle, and showed any
future employer that he had to be watched. But it also made him clumsy at
the tables. It meant he was focusing on simple things like the mechanics of
the deal instead of watching the players.
Kaz couldn’t see Inej’s face in the dark, but he sensed her disapproval.
“Greed is your god, Kaz.”
He almost laughed at that. “No, Inej. Greed bows to me. It is my servant
and my lever.”
“And what god do you serve, then?”
“Whichever will grant me good fortune.”
“I don’t think gods work that way.”
“I don’t think I care.”
She blew out an exasperated breath. Despite everything she’d been through,
Inej still believed her Suli Saints were watching over her. Kaz knew it, and
for some reason he loved to rile her. He wished he could read her
expression now. There was always something so satisfying about the little
furrow between her black brows.
“How did you know I would get to Van Daal in time?” she asked.
“Because you always do.”
“You should have given me more warning.”
“I thought your Saints would appreciate the challenge.”
For a while she said nothing, then from somewhere behind him he heard
her. “Men mock the gods
until they need them, Kaz.”
He didn’t see her go, only sensed her absence.
Kaz gave an irritated shake of his head. To say he trusted Inej would be
stretching the point, but he could admit to himself that he’d come to rely on
her. It had been a gut decision to pay off her indenture with the Menagerie,
and it had cost the Dregs sorely. Per Haskell had needed convincing, but
Inej was one of the best investments Kaz had ever made. That she was so
very good at remaining unseen made her an excellent thief of secrets, the
best in the Barrel. But the fact that she could simply erase herself bothered
him. She didn’t even have a scent. All people carried scents, and those
scents told stories – the hint of carbolic on a woman’s fingers or
woodsmoke in her hair, the wet wool of a man’s suit, or the tinge of
gunpowder lingering in his shirt cuffs. But not Inej. She’d somehow
mastered invisibility. She was a valuable asset. So why couldn’t she just do
her job and spare him her moods?
Suddenly, Kaz knew he wasn’t alone. He paused, listening. He’d cut
through a tight alley split by a murky canal. There were no streetlamps here
and little foot traffic, nothing but the bright moon and the small boats
bumping against their moorings. He’d dropped his guard, let his mind give
in to distraction.
A man’s dark shape appeared at the head of the alley.
“What business?” Kaz asked.
The shape lunged at him. Kaz swung his cane in a low arc. It should have
made direct contact with his attacker ’s legs, but instead it sailed through
empty space. Kaz stumbled, thrown off balance by the force of his swing.
Then, somehow, the man was standing right in front of him. A fist
connected with Kaz’s jaw. Kaz shook off the stars that rocketed through his
head. He spun back around and swung again. But no one was there. The
weighted head of Kaz’s walking stick whooshed through nothing and
cracked against the wall.
Kaz felt the cane torn from his hands by someone on his right. Was there
more than one of them?
And then a man stepped through the wall. Kaz’s mind stuttered and reeled,
trying to explain what he was seeing as a cluster of mist became a cloak,
boots, the pale flash of a face.
Ghosts, Kaz thought. A boy’s fear, but it came with absolute surety. Jordie
had come for his vengeance at last. It’s time to pay your debts, Kaz. You
never get something for nothing.
The thought passed through Kaz’s mind in a humiliating, gibbering wave of
panic, then the phantom was upon him, and he felt the sharp jab of a needle
in his neck. A ghost with a syringe?
Fool, he thought. And then he was in the dark.
Kaz woke to the sharp scent of ammonia. His head jerked back as he
returned fully to consciousness.
The old man in front of him wore the robes of a university medik. He had a
bottle of wuftsalts in his hand that he was waving beneath Kaz’s nose. The
stink was nearly unbearable.
“Get away from me,” Kaz rasped.
The medik eyed him dispassionately, returning the wuftsalts to their leather
pouch. Kaz flexed his fingers, but that was all he could do. He’d been
shackled to a chair with his arms behind his back.
Whatever they’d injected him with had left him groggy.
The medik moved aside, and Kaz blinked twice, trying to clear his vision
and make sense of the absurd luxury of his surroundings. He’d expected to
wake in the den of the Black Tips or some other rival gang. But this wasn’t
cheap Barrel flash. A squat decked out like this took real money –
mahogany panels dense with carvings of frothing waves and flying fish,
shelves lined with books, leaded windows, and he was fairly sure that was a
real DeKappel. One of those demure oil portraits of a lady with a book open
in her lap and a lamb lying at her feet. The man observing him from behind
a broad desk had the prosperous look of a mercher. But if this was his
house, why were there armed members of the stadwatch guarding the door?
Damn it, Kaz thought, am I under arrest? If so, this merch was in for a
surprise. Thanks to Inej, he had information on every judge, bailiff, and
high councilman in Kerch. He’d be out of his cell before sunrise. Except he
wasn’t in a cell, he was chained to a chair, so what the hell was going on?
The man was in his forties with a gaunt but handsome face and a hairline
making a determined retreat from his forehead. When Kaz met his gaze, the
man cleared his throat and pressed his fingers together.
“Mister Brekker, I hope you’re not feeling too poorly.”
“Get this old canker away from me. I feel fine.”
The merch gave a nod to the medik. “You may go. Please send me your bill.
And I would, of course, appreciate your discretion in this matter.”
The medik secured his bag and exited the room. As he did, the mercher rose
and picked up a sheaf of papers from his desk. He wore the perfectly cut
frock coat and vest of all Kerch merchants – dark, refined, deliberately
staid. But the pocket watch and tie pin told Kaz all he needed to know:
Heavy links of laurel leaves made up the watch’s gold fob, and the pin was
a massive, perfect ruby.
I’m going to pry that fat jewel from its setting and jab the pin right through
your mercher neck for chaining me to a chair, Kaz thought. But all he said
was, “Van Eck.”
The man nodded. No bow, of course. Merchants didn’t bow to scum from
the Barrel. “You know
me, then?”
Kaz knew the symbols and jewels of all the Kerch merchant houses. Van
Eck’s crest was the red laurel. It didn’t take a professor to make the
connection.
“I know you,” he said. “You’re one of those merch crusaders always trying
to clean up the Barrel.”
Van Eck gave another small nod. “I try to find men honest work.”
Kaz laughed. “What’s the difference between wagering at the Crow Club
and speculating on the floor of the Exchange?”
“One is theft and the other is commerce.”
“When a man loses his money, he may have trouble telling them apart.”
“The Barrel is a den of filth, vice, violence—”
“How many of the ships you send sailing out of the Ketterdam harbours
never return?”
“That doesn’t—”
“One out of five, Van Eck. One out of every five vessels you send seeking
coffee and jurda and bolts of silk sinks to the bottom of the sea, crashes on
the rocks, falls prey to pirates. One out of five crews dead, their bodies lost
to foreign waters, food for deep sea fishes. Let’s not speak of violence.”
“I won’t argue ethics with a stripling from the Barrel.”
Kaz didn’t really expect him to. He was just stalling for time as he tested
the tightness of the cuffs around his wrists. He let his fingers feel along the
length of chain as far as they were able, still puzzling over where Van Eck
had brought him. Though Kaz had never met the man himself, he’d had
cause to learn the layout of Van Eck’s house inside and out. Wherever they
were, it wasn’t the mercher ’s mansion.
“Since you didn’t bring me here to philosophise, what business?” It was the
question spoken at the opening of any meeting. A greeting from a peer, not
a plea from a prisoner.
“I have a proposition for you. Rather, the Council does.”
Kaz hid his surprise. “Does the Merchant Council begin all negotiations
with a beating?”
“Consider it a warning. And a demonstration.”
Kaz remembered the shape from the alley, the way it had appeared and
disappeared like a ghost.
Jordie.
He gave himself an internal shake. Not Jordie, you podge. Focus. They’d
nabbed him because he’d been flush off a victory and distracted. This was
his punishment, and it wasn’t a mistake he’d make again. That doesn’t
explain the phantom. For now, he pushed the thought aside.
“What possible use would the Merchant Council have for me?”
Van Eck thumbed through the papers in his hand. “You were first arrested at
ten,” he said, scanning the page.
“Everyone remembers his first time.”
“Twice again that year, twice at eleven. You were picked up when the
stadwatch rousted a gambling hall when you were fourteen, but you haven’t
served any time since.”
It was true. No one had managed a pinch on Kaz in three years. “I cleaned
up,” Kaz said. “Found honest work, live a life of industry and prayer.”
“Don’t blaspheme,” Van Eck said mildly, but his eyes flashed briefly with
anger.
A man of faith, Kaz noted, as his mind sorted through everything he knew
about Van Eck –
prosperous, pious, a widower recently remarried to a bride not much older
than Kaz himself. And, of course, there was the mystery of Van Eck’s son.
Van Eck continued paging through the file. “You run book on prize fights,
horses, and your own games of chance. You’ve been floor boss at the Crow
Club for more than two years. You’re the youngest to ever run a betting
shop, and you’ve doubled its profits in that time. You’re a blackmailer
—”
“I broker information.”
“A con artist—”
“I create opportunity.”
“A bawd and a murderer—”
“I don’t run whores, and I kill for a cause.”
“And what cause is that?”
“Same as yours, merch. Profit.”
“How do you get your information, Mister Brekker?”
“You might say I’m a lockpick.”
“You must be a very gifted one.”
“I am indeed.” Kaz leaned back slightly. “You see, every man is a safe, a
vault of secrets and longings. Now, there are those who take the brute’s
way, but I prefer a gentler approach – the right pressure applied at the right
moment, in the right place. It’s a delicate thing.”
“Do you always speak in metaphors, Mister Brekker?”
Kaz smiled. “It’s not a metaphor.”
He was out of his chair before his chains hit the ground. He leaped the desk,
snatching a letter opener from its surface in one hand, and catching hold of
the front of Van Eck’s shirt with the other.
The fine fabric bunched as he pressed the blade to Van Eck’s throat. Kaz
was dizzy, and his limbs felt creaky from being trapped in the chair, but
everything seemed sunnier with a weapon in his hand.
Van Eck’s guards were facing him, all with guns and swords drawn. He
could feel the merch’s heart pounding beneath the wool of his suit.
“I don’t think I need to waste breath on threats,” Kaz said. “Tell me how to
get to the door or I’m taking you through the window with me.”
“I think I can change your mind.”
Kaz gave him a little jostle. “I don’t care who you are or how big that ruby
is. You don’t take me from my own streets. And you don’t try to make a
deal with me while I’m in chains.”
“Mikka,” Van Eck called.
And then it happened again. A boy walked through the library wall. He was
pale as a corpse and wore an embroidered blue Grisha Tidemaker ’s coat
with a red-and-gold ribbon at the lapel indicating his association with Van
Eck’s house. But not even Grisha could just stroll through a wall.
Drugged, Kaz thought, trying not to panic. I’ve been drugged. Or it was
some kind of illusion, the kind they performed in the theatres off East Stave
– a girl cut in half, doves from a teapot.
“What the hell is this?” he growled.
“Let me go and I’ll explain.”
“You can explain right where you are.”
Van Eck huffed a short, shaky breath. “What you’re seeing are the effects of
jurda parem.”
“Jurda is just a stimulant.” The little dried blossoms were grown in Novyi
Zem and sold in shops all over Ketterdam. In his early days in the Dregs,
Kaz had chewed them to stay alert during stakeouts.
It had stained his teeth orange for days after. “It’s harmless,” he said.
“Jurda parem is something completely different, and it is most definitely
not harmless.”
“So you did drug me.”
“Not you, Mister Brekker. Mikka.”
Kaz took in the sickly pallor of the Grisha’s face. He had dark hollows
beneath his eyes, and the fragile, trembling build of someone who had
missed several meals and didn’t seem to care.
“Jurda parem is a cousin to ordinary jurda,” Van Eck continued. “It comes
from the same plant.
We’re not sure of the process by which the drug is made, but a sample of it
was sent to the Kerch Merchant Council by a scientist named Bo YulBayur.”
“Shu?”
“Yes. He wished to defect, so he sent us a sample to convince us of his
claims regarding the drug’s extraordinary effects. Please, Mister Brekker,
this is a most uncomfortable position. If you’d like, I will give you a pistol,
and we can sit and discuss this in more civilised fashion.”
“A pistol and my cane.”
Van Eck gestured to one of his guards, who exited the room and returned a
moment later with Kaz’s walking stick – Kaz was just glad he used the
damn door.
“Pistol first,” Kaz said. “Slowly.” The guard unholstered his weapon and
handed it to Kaz by the grip. Kaz grabbed and cocked it in one quick
movement, then released Van Eck, tossed the letter opener on to the desk,
and snatched his cane from the guard’s hand. The pistol was more useful,
but the cane brought Kaz a relief he didn’t care to quantify.
Van Eck took a few steps backwards, putting distance between himself and
Kaz’s loaded gun. He didn’t seem eager to sit. Neither was Kaz, so he kept
close to the window, ready to bolt if need be.
Van Eck took a deep breath and tried to set his suit to rights. “That cane is
quite a piece of hardware, Mister Brekker. Is it Fabrikator made?”
It was, in fact, the work of a Grisha Fabrikator, lead-lined and perfectly
weighted for breaking bones. “None of your business. Get talking, Van
Eck.”
The mercher cleared his throat. “When Bo Yul-Bayur sent us the sample of
jurda parem, we fed it to three Grisha, one from each Order.”
“Happy volunteers?”
“Indentures,” Van Eck conceded. “The first two were a Fabrikator and a
Healer indentured to Councilman Hoede. Mikka is a Tidemaker. He’s mine.
You’ve seen what he can do using the drug.”
Hoede. Why did that name ring a bell?
“I don’t know what I’ve seen,” Kaz said as he glanced at Mikka. The boy’s
gaze was focused intently on Van Eck as if awaiting his next command. Or
maybe another fix.
“An ordinary Tidemaker can control currents, summon water or moisture
from the air or a nearby source. They manage the tides in our harbour. But
under the influence of jurda parem, a Tidemaker can alter his own state
from solid to liquid to gas and back again, and do the same with other
objects.
Even a wall.”
Kaz was tempted to deny it, but he couldn’t explain what he’d just seen any
other way. “How?”
“It’s hard to say. You’re aware of the amplifiers some Grisha wear?”
“I’ve seen them,” Kaz said. Animal bones, teeth, scales. “I hear they’re hard
to come by.”
“Very. But they only increase a Grisha’s power. Jurda parem alters a
Grisha’s perception.”
“So?”
“Grisha manipulate matter at its most fundamental levels. They call it the
Small Science. Under the influence of parem, those manipulations become
faster and far more precise. In theory, jurda parem is just a stimulant like its
ordinary cousin. But it seems to sharpen and hone a Grisha’s senses. They
can make connections with extraordinary speed. Things become possible
that simply shouldn’t be.”
“What does it do to sorry sobs like you and me?”
Van Eck seemed to bristle slightly at being lumped in with Kaz, but he said,
“It’s lethal. An ordinary mind cannot tolerate parem in even the lowest
doses.”
“You said you gave it to three Grisha. What can the others do?”
“Here,” Van Eck said, reaching for a drawer in his desk.
Kat lifted his pistol. “Easy.”
With exaggerated slowness, Van Eck slid his hand into the desk drawer and
pulled out a lump of gold. “This started as lead.”
“Like hell it did.”
Van Eck shrugged. “I can only tell you what I saw. The Fabrikator took a
piece of lead in his hands, and moments later we had this.”
“How do you even know it’s real?” asked Kaz.
“It has the same melting point as gold, the same weight and malleability. If
it’s not identical to gold in every way, the difference has eluded us. Have it
tested if you like.”
Kaz tucked his cane under his arm and took the heavy lump from Van Eck’s
hand. He slipped it into his pocket. Whether it was real or just a convincing
imitation, a chunk of yellow that big could buy plenty on the streets of the
Barrel.
“You could have got that anywhere,” Kaz pointed out.
“I would bring Hoede’s Fabrikator here to show you himself, but he isn’t
well.”
Kaz’s gaze flicked to Mikka’s sickly face and damp brow. The drug clearly
came with a price.
“Let’s say this is all true and not cheap, coin-trick magic. What does it have
to do with me?”
“Perhaps you heard of the Shu paying off the entirety of their debt to Kerch
with a sudden influx of gold? The assassination of the trade ambassador
from Novyi Zem? The theft of documents from a military base in Ravka?”
So that was the secret behind the murder of the ambassador in the
washroom. And the gold in those three Shu ships must have been Fabrikator
made. Kaz hadn’t heard anything about Ravkan documents, but he nodded
anyway.
“We believe all these occurrences are the work of Grisha under the control
of the Shu government and under the influence of jurda parem.” Van Eck
scrubbed a hand over his jaw. “Mister Brekker, I want you to think for a
moment about what I’m telling you. Men who can walk through walls – no
vault or fortress will ever be safe again. People who can make gold from
lead, or anything else for that matter, who can alter the very material of the
world – financial markets would be thrown into chaos. The world economy
would collapse.”
“Very exciting. What is it you want from me, Van Eck? You want me to
steal a shipment? The formula?”
“No, I want you to steal the man.”
“Kidnap Bo Yul-Bayur?”
“Save him. A month ago we received a message from Yul-Bayur begging
for asylum. He was concerned about his government’s plans for jurda
parem, and we agreed to help him defect. We set up a rendezvous, but there
was a skirmish at the drop point.”
“With the Shu?”
“No, with Fjerdans.”
Kaz frowned. The Fjerdans must have spies deep in Shu Han or Kerch if
they had learned about the drug and Bo Yul-Bayur ’s plans so quickly. “So
send some of your agents after him.”
“The diplomatic situation is somewhat delicate. It is essential that our
government not be tied to Yul-Bayur in any way.”
“You have to know he’s probably dead. The Fjerdans hate Grisha. There’s
no way they’d let knowledge of this drug get out.”
“Our sources say he is very much alive and that he is awaiting trial.” Van
Eck cleared his throat.
“At the Ice Court.”
Kaz stared at Van Eck for a long minute, then burst out laughing. “Well, it’s
been a pleasure being knocked unconscious and taken captive by you, Van
Eck. You can be sure your hospitality will be repaid when the time is right.
Now have one of your lackeys show me to the door.”
“We’re prepared to offer you five million kruge.”
Kaz pocketed the pistol. He wasn’t afraid for his life now, just irritated that
this fink had wasted his time. “This may come as a surprise to you, Van
Eck, but we canal rats value our lives just as much as you do yours.”
“Ten million.”
“There’s no point to a fortune I won’t be alive to spend. Where’s my hat –
did your Tidemaker leave it behind in the alley?”
“Twenty.”
Kaz paused. He had the eerie sense that the carved fish on the walls had
halted mid-leap to listen.
“Twenty million kruge?”
Van Eck nodded. He didn’t look happy.
“I’d need to convince a team to walk into a suicide mission. That won’t
come cheap.” That wasn’t entirely true. Despite what he’d said to Van Eck,
there were plenty of people in the Barrel who didn’t have much to live for.
“Twenty million kruge is hardly cheap,” Van Eck snapped.
“The Ice Court has never been breached.”
“That’s why we need you, Mister Brekker. It’s possible Bo Yul-Bayur is
already dead or that he’s given up all his secrets to the Fjerdans, but we
think we have at least a little time to act before the secret of jurda parem is
put into play.”
“If the Shu have the formula—”
“Yul-Bayur claimed he’d managed to mislead his superiors and keep the
specifics of the formula secret. We think they’re operating from whatever
limited supply Yul-Bayur left behind.”
Greed bows to me. Maybe Kaz had been a bit too cocky on that front. Now
greed was doing Van Eck’s bidding. The lever was at work, overcoming
Kaz’s resistance, moving him into place.
Twenty million kruge. What kind of job would this be? Kaz didn’t know
anything about espionage or government squabbles, but why should
stealing Bo Yul-Bayur from the Ice Court be any different from liberating
valuables from a mercher ’s safe? The most well-protected safe in the world,
he reminded himself. He’d need a very specialised team, a desperate team
that wouldn’t balk at the real possibility that they’d never come back from
this job. And he wouldn’t be able to just pull from the Dregs. He didn’t
have the talent he’d need in their ranks. That meant he’d have to watch his
back more than usual.
But if they managed it, even after Per Haskell got his cut, Kaz’s share of the
scrub would be enough to change everything, to finally put into motion the
dream he’d had since he’d first crawled out of a cold harbour with revenge
burning a hole in his heart. His debt to Jordie would be paid at last.
There would be other benefits, too. The Kerch Council would owe him, to
say nothing of what this particular heist would do for his reputation. To
infiltrate the impenetrable Ice Court and snatch a prize from the bastion of
Fjerdan nobility and military might? With a job like this under his belt and
that kind of scrub at his fingertips, he wouldn’t need Per Haskell any more.
He could start his own operation.
But something was off. “Why me? Why the Dregs? There are more
experienced crews out there.”
Mikka started to cough, and Kaz saw blood on his sleeve.
“Sit,” Van Eck instructed gently, helping Mikka into a chair and offering the
Grisha his handkerchief. He signalled to a guard. “Some water.”
“Well?” prodded Kaz.
“How old are you, Mister Brekker?”
“Seventeen.”
“You haven’t been arrested since you were fourteen, and since I know you
are not an honest man any more than you were an honest boy, I can only
assume you have the quality I most need in a criminal: You don’t get caught.
” Van Eck smiled slightly then. “There’s also the matter of my DeKappel.”
“I’m sure I don’t know what you mean.”
“Six months ago, a DeKappel oil worth nearly one hundred thousand kruge
disappeared from my home.”
“Quite a loss.”
“It was, especially since I had been assured that my gallery was
impenetrable and that the locks on its doors were foolproof.”
“I do seem to remember reading about that.”
“Yes,” admitted Van Eck with a small sigh. “Pride is a perilous thing. I was
eager to show off my acquisition and the lengths I’d gone to in order to
protect it. And yet, despite all my safeguards, despite dogs and alarms and
the most loyal staff in all of Ketterdam, my painting is gone.”
“My condolences.”
“It has yet to surface anywhere on the world market.”
“Maybe your thief already had a buyer lined up.”
“A possibility, of course. But I’m inclined to believe that the thief took it
for a different reason.”
“What would that be?”
“Just to prove that he could.”
“Seems like a stupid risk to me.”
“Well, who can guess at the motives of thieves?”
“Not me, certainly.”
“From what I know of the Ice Court, whoever stole my DeKappel is exactly
who I need for this job.”
“Then you’d be better off hiring him. Or her.”
“Indeed. But I’ll have to settle for you.”
Van Eck held Kaz’s gaze as if he hoped to find a confession written
between his eyes. At last, Van Eck asked, “We have a deal then?”
“Not so fast. What about the Healer?”
Van Eck looked baffled. “Who?”
“You said you gave the drug to a Grisha from each Order. Mikka’s a
Tidemaker – he’s your Etherealnik. The Fabrikator who mocked up that
gold was a Materialnik. So what happened to the Corporalnik? The
Healer?”
Van Eck winced slightly, but simply said, “Will you accompany me, Mister
Brekker?”
Warily, keeping one eye on Mikka and the guards, Kaz followed Van Eck
out of the library and down the hall. The house dripped mercher wealth –
walls panelled in dark wood, floors tiled in clean black and white, all in
good taste, all perfectly restrained and impeccably crafted. But it had the
feel of a graveyard. The rooms were deserted, the curtains drawn, the
furniture covered in white sheets so that each shadowy chamber they passed
looked like some kind of forgotten seascape cluttered with icebergs.
Hoede. Now the name clicked into place. There’d been some kind of
incident at Hoede’s mansion on the Geldstraat last week. The whole place
had been cordoned off and crawling with stadwatch. Kaz had heard
rumours of a firepox outbreak, but even Inej hadn’t been able to learn more.
“This is Councilman Hoede’s house,” Kaz said, skin crawling. He wanted
no part of a plague, but the merch and his guards didn’t seem remotely
concerned. “I thought this place was under quarantine.”
“What happened here is no danger to us. And if you do your job, Mister
Brekker, it never will be.”
Van Eck led him through a door and into a manicured garden, thick with the
new nectar scent of early crocuses. The smell hit Kaz like a blow to the jaw.
Memories of Jordie were already too fresh in his mind, and for a moment,
Kaz wasn’t walking through the canal-side garden of a rich merch, he was
knee-deep in spring grasses, hot sun beating down on his cheeks, his
brother ’s voice calling him home.
Kaz gave himself a shake. I need a mug of the darkest, bitterest coffee I can
find, he thought. Or maybe a real punch to the jaw.
Van Eck was leading him to a boathouse that faced the canal. The light
filtering out between its shuttered windows cast patterns on the garden path.
A single city guard stood at attention beside the door as Van Eck slid a key
from his pocket and into the heavy lock. Kaz put his sleeve up to his mouth
as the stink from the closed-up room reached him – urine, excrement. So
much for spring crocuses.
The room was lit by two glass lanterns on the wall. A group of guards stood
facing a large iron box, shattered glass littering the floor at their feet. Some
wore the purple uniform of the stadwatch, others the sea green livery of the
Hoede house. Through what Kaz now understood had been an observation
window, he saw another city guard standing in front of an empty table and
two overturned chairs. Like the others, the guard stood with his arms loose
at his sides, face blank, eyes forwards, gazing at nothing. Van Eck turned up
the light on one of the lanterns, and Kaz saw a body in a purple uniform
slumped on the floor, eyes closed.
Van Eck sighed and crouched down to turn the body over. “We’ve lost
another,” he said.
The boy was young, the bare scraps of a moustache on his upper lip.
Van Eck gave orders to the guard who had let them in, and with help from
one of Van Eck’s retinue they lifted the corpse and took it from the room.
The other guards didn’t react, just continued to stare ahead.
Kaz recognised one of them – Henrik Dahlman, the captain of the
stadwatch.
“Dahlman?” he queried, but the man made no response. Kaz waved a hand
in front of the captain’s face, then gave him a hard flick on the ear. Nothing
but a slow, disinterested blink. Kaz raised his pistol and aimed it directly at
the captain’s forehead. He cocked the hammer. The captain didn’t flinch,
didn’t react. His pupils didn’t contract.
“He’s as good as dead,” said Van Eck. “Shoot. Blow his brains out. He
won’t protest and the others won’t react.”
Kaz lowered his weapon, a chill settling deep into his bones. “What is this?
What happened to them?”
“The Grisha was a Corporalnik serving her indenture with Councilman
Hoede’s household. He thought because she was a Healer and not a
Heartrender, he was making the safe choice to test the parem.”
Seemed smart enough. Kaz had seen Heartrenders at work. They could
rupture your cells, burst your heart in your chest, steal the breath from your
lungs, or lower your pulse so that you dropped into a coma, all while never
laying a finger on you. If even part of what Van Eck said was true, the idea
of one of them dosed with jurda parem was a daunting proposition. So the
merchers had tried the drug on a Healer instead. But apparently things
hadn’t gone according to plan.
“You gave her the drug, and she killed her master?”
“Not exactly,” Van Eck said, clearing his throat. “They had her in that
observation cell. Within seconds of consuming the parem, she took control
of the guard inside the chamber—”
“How?”
“We don’t know exactly. But whatever method she used, it allowed her to
subdue these guards as well.”
“That’s not possible.”
“Isn’t it? The brain is just one more organ, a cluster of cells and impulses.
Why shouldn’t a Grisha under the influence of jurda parem be able to
manipulate those impulses?”
Kaz’s disbelief must have shown.
“Look at these people,” Van Eck insisted. “She told them to wait. And that’s
exactly what they’ve done – that’s all they’ve done since.”
Kaz studied the silent group more closely. Their eyes weren’t blank or dead,
their bodies weren’t quite at rest. They were expectant. He suppressed a
shiver. He’d seen peculiar things, extraordinary things, but nothing like
what he’d witnessed tonight.
“What happened to Hoede?”
“She commanded him to open the door, and when he did, she ordered him
to cut the thumb from
his hand. We only know how it all happened because a kitchen boy was
present. The Grisha girl left him untouched, but he claims Hoede carved
away his own thumb, smiling all the while.”
Kaz didn’t like the idea of some Grisha moving things around in his head.
But he wouldn’t be surprised if Hoede deserved whatever he’d got. During
Ravka’s civil war, a lot of Grisha had fled the fighting and paid their way to
Kerch by becoming indentures without realising that they’d essentially sold
themselves into slavery.
“The merch is dead?”
“Councilman Hoede lost a great deal of blood, but he’s in the same state as
these men. He’s been removed to the country with his family and the staff
from his house.”
“Did the Grisha Healer go back to Ravka?” Kaz asked.
Van Eck gestured Kaz out of the eerie boathouse and locked the door
behind them.
“She may have attempted it,” he said as they retraced their steps through the
garden and along the side of the house. “We know she secured a small craft,
and we suspect she was headed to Ravka, but we found her body washed up
two days ago near Third Harbour. We think she drowned trying to get back
into the city.”
“Why would she come back here?”
“For more jurda parem.”
Kaz thought of Mikka’s glittering eyes and waxy skin. “It’s that addictive?”
“It seems to take only one dose. Once the drug has run its course, it leaves
the Grisha’s body weakened and the craving is intense. It’s quite
debilitating.”
Quite debilitating seemed like a bit of an understatement. The Council of
Tides controlled entry to the Ketterdam harbours. If the drugged Healer had
tried to return at night in a small boat, she wouldn’t have had much of a
chance against the current. Kaz thought of Mikka’s gaunt face, the way his
clothes hung from his body. The drug had done that to him. He’d been high
on jurda parem and already greedy for the next dose. He’d also looked
ready to keel over. How long could a Grisha go on that way?
It was an interesting question, but not relevant to the matter at hand. They’d
arrived at the front gate. It was time to settle up.
“Thirty million kruge,” Kaz said.
“We said twenty!” sputtered Van Eck.
“You said twenty. It’s clear you’re desperate.” Kaz glanced back in the
direction of the boathouse, where a room full of men simply waited to die.
“And now I see why.”
“The Council will have my head.”
“They’ll sing your praises once you have Bo Yul-Bayur safely hidden away
wherever you intend
to keep him.”
“Novyi Zem.”
Kaz shrugged. “You can put him in a coffeepot for all I care.”
Van Eck’s gaze locked on his. “You’ve seen what this drug can do. I assure
you it is just the beginning. If jurda parem is unleashed on the world, war is
inevitable. Our trade lines will be destroyed, and our markets will collapse.
Kerch will not survive it. Our hopes rest with you, Mister Brekker. If you
fail, all the world will suffer for it.”
“Oh, it’s worse than that, Van Eck. If I fail, I don’t get paid.”
The look of disgust on the merch’s face was something that deserved its
own DeKappel oil to commemorate it.
“Don’t look so disappointed. Just think how miserable you would have been
to discover this canal rat had a patriotic streak. You might actually have had
to uncurl that lip and treat me with something closer to respect.”
“Thank you for sparing me that discomfort,” Van Eck said disdainfully. He
opened the door, then paused. “I do wonder what a boy of your intelligence
might have amounted to under different circumstances.”
Ask Jordie, Kaz thought with a bitter pang. But he simply shrugged. “I’d
just be stealing from a better class of sucker. Thirty million kruge.”
Van Eck nodded. “Thirty. The deal is the deal.”
“The deal is the deal,” Kaz said. They shook.
As Van Eck’s neatly manicured hand clasped Kaz’s leather-clad fingers, the
merch narrowed his eyes.
“Why do you wear the gloves, Mister Brekker?”
Kaz raised a brow. “I’m sure you’ve heard the stories.”
“Each more grotesque than the last.”
Kaz had heard them, too. Brekker ’s hands were stained with blood.
Brekker ’s hands were covered in scars. Brekker had claws and not fingers
because he was part demon. Brekker ’s touch burned like brimstone – a
single brush of his bare skin caused your flesh to wither and die.
“Pick one,” Kaz said as he vanished into the night, thoughts already turning
to thirty million kruge and the crew he’d need to help him get it. “They’re
all true enough.”
Inej knew the moment Kaz entered the Slat. His presence reverberated
through the cramped rooms and crooked hallways as every thug, thief,
dealer, conman, and steerer came a little more awake. Per Haskell’s
favoured lieutenant was home.
The Slat wasn’t much, just another house in the worst part of the Barrel,
three storeys stacked tight on top of each other, crowned with an attic and a
gabled roof. Most of the buildings in this part of the city had been built
without foundations, many on swampy land where the canals were
haphazardly dug. They leaned against each other like tipsy friends gathered
at a bar, tilting at drowsy angles. Inej had visited plenty of them on errands
for the Dregs, and they weren’t much better on the inside – cold and damp,
plaster sliding from the walls, gaps in the windows wide enough to let in the
rain and snow.
Kaz had spent his own money to have the Slat’s drafts shorn up and its
walls insulated. It was ugly, crooked, and crowded, but the Slat was
gloriously dry.
Inej’s room was on the third floor, a skinny slice of space barely big enough
for a cot and a trunk, but with a window that looked out over the peaked
roofs and jumbled chimneys of the Barrel. When the wind came through
and cleared away the haze of coal smoke that hung over the city, she could
even make out a blue pocket of harbour.
Though dawn was just a few hours away, the Slat was wide awake. The
only time the house was ever really quiet was in the slow hours of the
afternoon, and tonight everyone was buzzing with the news of the
showdown at the Exchange, Big Bolliger ’s fate, and now poor Rojakke’s
dismissal.
Inej had gone straight from her conversation with Kaz to seek out the card
dealer at the Crow Club.
He’d been at the tables dealing Three Man Bramble for Jesper and a couple
of Ravkan tourists. When he’d finished the hand, Inej had suggested they
speak in one of the private gaming parlours to spare him the embarrassment
of being fired in front of his friends, but Rojakke wasn’t having it.
“It’s not fair,” he’d bellowed when she’d told him Kaz’s orders. “I ain’t no
cheat!”
“Take it up with Kaz,” Inej had replied quietly.
“And keep your voice down,” Jesper added, glancing at the tourists and
sailors seated at the neighbouring tables. Fights were common in the Barrel,
but not on the floor of the Crow Club. If you had a gripe, you settled it
outside, where you didn’t risk interrupting the hallowed practice of
separating pigeons from their money.
“Where’s Brekker?” growled Rojakke.
“I don’t know.”
“You always know everything about everything,” Rojakke sneered, leaning
in, the stink of lager and onions on his breath. “Isn’t that what Dirtyhands
pays you for?”
“I don’t know where he is or when he’s getting back. But I do know you
won’t want to be here when he does.”
“Give me my cheque. I’m owed for my last shift.”
“Brekker doesn’t owe you anything.”
“He can’t even face me? Sends a little girl to give me the boot? Maybe I’ll
just shake a few coins out of you.” He’d reached to grab her by the collar of
her shirt, but she’d dodged him easily. He fumbled for her again.
Out of the corner of her eye, Inej saw Jesper rise from his seat, but she
waved him off and slipped her fingers into the brass knuckles she kept in
her right hip pocket. She gave Rojakke a swift crack across the left cheek.
His hand flew up to his face. “Hey,” he said. “I didn’t hurt you none. It was
just words.”
People were watching now, so she hit him again. Regardless of the Crow
Club rules, this took precedence. When Kaz had brought her to the Slat,
he’d warned her that he wouldn’t be able to watch out for her, that she’d
have to fend for herself, and she had. It would have been easy enough to
turn away when they called her names or sidled up to ask for a cuddle, but
do that and soon it was a hand up your blouse or a try at you against a wall.
So she’d let no insult or innuendo slide. She’d always struck first and struck
hard. Sometimes she even cut them up a bit. It was fatiguing, but nothing
was sacred to the Kerch except trade, so she’d gone out of her way to make
the risk much higher than the reward when it came to disrespecting her.
Rojakke touched his fingers to the ugly bruise forming on his cheek,
looking surprised and a bit betrayed. “I thought we was friendly,” he
protested.
The sad part was that they were. Inej liked Rojakke. But right now, he was
just a frightened man looking to feel bigger than someone.
“Rojakke,” she’d said. “I’ve seen you work a deck of cards. You can get a
job in almost any den.
Go home and be grateful Kaz doesn’t take what you owe him out of your
hide, hmmm?”
He’d gone, a bit wobbly on his feet, still clutching his cheek like a stunned
toddler, and Jesper had sauntered over.
“He’s right, you know. Kaz shouldn’t send you to do his dirty work.”
“It’s all dirty work.”
“But we do it just the same,” he said with a sigh.
“You look exhausted. Will you sleep at all tonight?”
Jesper just winked. “Not while the cards are hot. Stay and play a bit. Kaz
will stake you.”
“Really, Jesper?” she’d said, pulling up her hood. “If I want to watch men
dig holes to fall into, I’ll find myself a cemetery.”
“Come on, Inej,” he’d called after her as she passed through the big double
doors onto the street.
“You’re good luck!”
Saints, she’d thought, if he believes that, he really must be desperate. She’d
left her luck behind in a Suli camp on the shores of West Ravka. She
doubted she’d see either again.
Now Inej left her tiny chamber in the Slat and headed downstairs by way of
the banisters. There was no reason to cloak her movements here, but silence
was a habit, and the stairs tended to squeak like mating mice. When she
reached the second floor landing and saw the crowd milling below, she
hung back.
Kaz had been gone longer than anyone had expected, and as soon as he’d
entered the shadowy foyer, he’d been waylaid by people looking to
congratulate him on his routing of Geels and asking for news of the Black
Tips.
“Rumour has it Geels is already putting together a mob to move on us,” said
Anika.
“Let him!” rumbled Dirix. “I’ve got an axe handle with his name on it.”
“Geels won’t act for a while,” said Kaz as he moved down the hall. “He
doesn’t have the numbers to face us in the streets, and his coffers are too
empty to hire on more hands. Shouldn’t you be on your way to the Crow
Club?”
The raised eyebrow was enough to send Anika scurrying away, Dirix on her
heels. Others came to offer congratulations or make threats against the
Black Tips. No one went so far as to pat Kaz on the back, though – that was
a good way to lose a hand.
Inej knew Kaz would stop to speak to Per Haskell, so instead of descending
the final flight of stairs, she moved down the hallway. There was a closet
here, full of odds and ends, old chairs with broken backs, paint-spattered
canvas sheeting. Inej moved aside a bucket full of cleaning supplies that
she’d placed there precisely because she knew no one in the Slat would ever
touch it. The grate beneath it offered a perfect view of Per Haskell’s office.
She felt slightly guilty for eavesdropping on Kaz, but he was the one who
had turned her into a spy. You couldn’t train a falcon, then expect it not to
hunt.
Through the grate she heard Kaz’s knock on Per Haskell’s door and the
sound of his greeting.
“Back and still breathing?” the old man inquired. She could just see him
seated in his favourite chair, fiddling with a model ship he’d been building
for the better part of a year, a pint of lager within arm’s reach, as always.
“We won’t have a problem with Fifth Harbour again.”
Haskell grunted and returned to his model ship. “Close the door.”
Inej heard it shut, muffling the sounds from the hallway. She could see the
top of Kaz’s head. His dark hair was damp. It must have started raining.
“You should have asked permission from me to deal with Bolliger,” said
Haskell.
“If I had talked to you first, word might have got out—”
“You think I’d let that happen?”
Kaz’s shoulders lifted. “This place is like anything in Ketterdam. It leaks.”
Inej could have sworn he looked directly at the vent when he said it.
“I don’t like it, boy. Big Bolliger was my soldier, not yours.”
“Of course,” Kaz said, but they both knew it was a lie. Haskell’s Dregs
were old guard, conmen and crooks from another time. Bolliger had been
one of Kaz’s crew – new blood, young and unafraid.
Maybe too unafraid.
“You’re smart, Brekker, but you need to learn patience.”
“Yes, sir.”
The old man barked a laugh. “Yes, sir. No, sir,” he mocked. “I know you’re
up to something when you start getting polite. Just what have you got
brewing?”
“A job,” Kaz said. “I may need to be gone for a spell.”
“Big money?”
“Very.”
“Big risk?”
“That, too. But you’ll get your twenty per cent.”
“You don’t make any major moves without my say-so, understood?” Kaz
must have nodded because Per Haskell leaned back in his chair and took a
sip of lager. “Are we to be very rich?”
“Rich as Saints in crowns of gold.”
The old man snorted. “Long as I don’t have to live like one.”
“I’ll talk to Pim,” Kaz said. “He can pick up the slack while I’m gone.” Inej
frowned. Just where was Kaz going? He hadn’t mentioned any big job to
her. And why Pim? The thought shamed her a bit.
She could almost hear her father ’s voice: So eager to be Queen of the
Thieves, Inej? It was one thing to do her job and do it well. It was quite
another to want to succeed at it. She didn’t want a permanent place with the
Dregs. She wanted to pay off her debts and be free of Ketterdam forever, so
why should she care if Kaz chose Pim to run the gang in his absence?
Because I’m smarter than Pim. Because Kaz trusts me more. But maybe he
didn’t trust the crew to follow a girl like her, only two years out of the
brothels, not even seventeen years old. She wore her sleeves long and the
sheath of her knife mostly hid the scar on the inside of her left forearm
where the Menagerie tattoo had once been, but they all knew it was there.
Kaz exited Haskell’s room, and Inej left her perch to wait for him as he
limped his way up the stairs.
“Rojakke?” he asked as he passed her and started up the second flight.
“Gone,” she said, falling in behind him.
“He put up much of a fight?”
“Nothing I couldn’t handle.”
“Not what I asked.”
“He was angry. He may come back around looking for trouble.”
“Never a shortage of that to hand out,” Kaz said as they reached the top
floor. The attic rooms had been converted into his office and bedroom. She
knew all those flights of stairs were brutal on his bad leg, but he seemed to
like having the whole floor to himself.
He entered the office and without looking back at her said, “Shut the door.”
The room was mostly taken up by a makeshift desk – an old warehouse
door atop stacked fruit crates – piled high with papers. Some of the floor
bosses had started using adding machines, clanking things crowded with
stiff brass buttons and spools of paper, but Kaz did the Crow Club tallies in
his head. He kept books, but only for the sake of the old man and so that he
had something to point to when he called someone out for cheating or when
he was looking for new investors.
That was one of the big changes Kaz had brought to the gang. He’d given
ordinary shopkeepers
and legitimate businessmen the chance to buy shares in the Crow Club. At
first they’d been skeptical, sure it was some kind of swindle, but he’d
brought them in with tiny stakes and managed to gather enough capital to
purchase the dilapidated old building, spruce it up, and get it running. It had
paid back big for those early investors. Or so the story went. Inej could
never be sure which stories about Kaz were true and which were rumours
he’d planted to serve his own ends. For all she knew, he’d conned some
poor honest trader out of his life savings to make the Crow Club thrive.
“I’ve got a job for you,” Kaz said as he flipped through the previous day’s
figures. Each sheet would go into his memory with barely a glance. “What
would you say to four million kruge?”
“Money like that is more curse than gift.”
“My little Suli idealist. All you need is a full belly and an open road?” he
said, the mockery clear in his voice.
“And an easy heart, Kaz.” That was the difficult part.
Now he laughed outright as he walked through the door to his tiny
bedroom. “No hopes of that. I’d rather have the cash. Do you want the
money or not?”
“You’re not in the business of giving gifts. What’s the job?”
“An impossible job, near certain death, terrible odds, but should we scrape
it …” He paused, fingers on the buttons of his waistcoat, his look distant,
almost dreamy. It was rare that she heard such excitement in his raspy
voice.
“Should we scrape it?” she prompted.
He grinned at her, his smile sudden and jarring as a thunderclap, his eyes
the near-black of bitter coffee. “We’ll be kings and queens, Inej. Kings and
queens.”
“Hmm,” she said noncommittally, pretending to examine one of her knives,
determined to ignore
that grin. Kaz was not a giddy boy smiling and making future plans with
her. He was a dangerous player who was always working an angle. Always,
she reminded herself firmly. Inej kept her eyes averted, shuffling a stack of
papers into a pile on the desk as Kaz stripped out of his vest and shirt. She
wasn’t sure if she was flattered or insulted that he didn’t seem to give a
second thought to her presence.
“How long will we be gone?” she asked, darting a glance at him through the
open doorway. He was corded muscle, scars, but only two tattoos – the
Dregs’ crow and cup on his forearm and above it, a black R on his bicep.
She’d never asked him what it meant.
It was his hands that drew her attention as he shucked off his leather gloves
and dipped a cloth in the wash basin. He only ever removed them in these
chambers, and as far as she knew, only in front of her. Whatever affliction
he might be hiding, she could see no sign of it, only slender lockpick’s
fingers, and a shiny rope of scar tissue from some long ago street fight.
“A few weeks, maybe a month,” he said as he ran the wet cloth under his
arms and the hard planes of his chest, water trickling down his torso.
For Saints’ sake, Inej thought as her cheeks heated. She’d lost most of her
modesty during her time with the Menagerie, but really, there were limits.
What would Kaz say if she suddenly stripped down and started washing
herself in front of him? He’d probably tell me not to drip on the desk, she
thought with a scowl.
“A month?” she said. “Are you sure you should be leaving with the Black
Tips so riled up?”
“This is the right gamble. Speaking of which, round up Jesper and Muzzen.
I want them here by dawn. And I’ll need Wylan waiting at the Crow Club
tomorrow night.”
“Wylan? If this is for a big job—”
“Just do it.”
Inej crossed her arms. One minute he made her blush and the next he made
her want to commit murder. “Are you going to explain any of this?”
“When we all meet.” He shrugged on a fresh shirt, then hesitated as he
fastened the collar. “This isn’t an assignment, Inej. It’s a job for you to take
or leave as you see fit.”
An alarm bell rang inside her. She endangered herself every day on the
streets of the Barrel. She’d murdered for the Dregs, stolen, brought down
bad men and good, and Kaz had never hinted that any of the assignments
were less than a command to be obeyed. This was the price she’d agreed to
when Per Haskell had purchased her contract and liberated her from the
Menagerie. So what was different about this job?
Kaz finished with his buttons, pulled on a charcoal waistcoat, and tossed
her something. It flashed in the air, and she caught it with one hand. When
she opened her fist, she saw a massive ruby tie pin circled by golden laurel
leaves.
“Fence it,” Kaz said.
“Whose is it?”
“Ours now.”
“Whose was it?”
Kaz stayed quiet. He picked up his coat, using a brush to clean the dried
mud from it. “Someone who should have thought better before he had me
jumped.”
“Jumped?”
“You heard me.”
“Someone got the drop on you?”
He looked at her and nodded once. Unease snaked through her and twisted
into an anxious, rustling coil. No one got the better of Kaz. He was the
toughest, scariest thing walking the alleys of the Barrel.
She relied on it. So did he.
“It won’t happen again,” he promised.
Kaz pulled on a clean pair of gloves, snapped up his walking stick, and
headed out the door. “I’ll be back in a few hours. Move the DeKappel we
lifted from Van Eck’s house to the vault. I think it’s rolled up under my bed.
Oh, and put in an order for a new hat.”
“Please.”
Kaz heaved a sigh as he braced himself for three painful flights of stairs. He
looked over his shoulder and said, “Please, my darling Inej, treasure of my
heart, won’t you do me the honour of acquiring me a new hat?”
Inej cast a meaningful glance at his cane. “Have a long trip down,” she said,
then leaped onto the banister, sliding from one flight to the next, slick as
butter in a pan.
Kaz followed East Stave towards the harbour, through the beginnings of the
Barrel’s gambling district. The Barrel was bracketed by two major canals,
East Stave and West Stave, each catering to a particular clientele, and
separated by a tangle of narrow streets and minor waterways. The buildings
of the Barrel were different from anywhere else in Ketterdam, bigger,
wider, painted in every garish colour, clamouring for attention from
passersby – the Treasure Chest, the Golden Bend, Weddell’s Riverboat. The
best of the betting halls were located further north, in the prime real estate
of the Lid, the section of the canal closest to the harbours, favourably
situated to attract tourists and sailors coming into port.
But not the Crow Club, Kaz mused as he looked up at the black-andcrimson façade. It had taken a lot to lure tourists and risk-hungry merchers
this far south for entertainment. Now the hour was coming up on four bells,
and the crowds were still thick outside the club. Kaz watched the tide of
people flowing past the portico’s black columns, beneath the watchful eye
of the oxidised silver crow that spread its wings above the entrance. Bless
the pigeons, he thought. Bless all you kind and generous folk ready to empty
your wallets into the Dregs’ coffers and call it a good time.
He could see barkers out front shouting to potential customers, offering free
drinks, hot pots of coffee, and the fairest deal in all of Ketterdam. He
acknowledged them with a nod and pressed further north.
Only one other gambling den on the Stave mattered to him: the Emerald
Palace, Pekka Rollins’
pride and joy. The building was an ugly green, decked out in artificial trees
laden with fake gold and silver coins. The whole place had been done up as
some kind of tribute to Rollins’ Kaelish heritage and his gang, the Dime
Lions. Even the girls working the chip counters and tables wore glittering
green sheaths of silk and had their hair tinted a dark, unnatural red to mimic
the look of girls from the Wandering Isle. As Kaz passed the Emerald, he
looked up at the false gold coins, letting the anger come at him. He needed
it tonight as a reminder of what he’d lost, of what he stood to gain. He
needed it to prepare him for this reckless endeavour.
“Brick by brick,” he muttered to himself. They were the only words that
kept his rage in check, that prevented him from striding through the
Emerald’s garish gold-and-green doors, demanding a private audience with
Rollins, and slitting his throat. Brick by brick. It was the promise that let
him sleep at night, that drove him every day, that kept Jordie’s ghost at bay.
Because a quick death was too good for Pekka Rollins.
Kaz watched the flow of customers in and out of the Emerald’s doors and
caught a glimpse of his own steerers, men and women he hired to seduce
Pekka’s customers south with the prospect of better deals, bigger wins,
prettier girls.
“Where are you coming from, looking so flush?” one said to the other,
talking far more loudly than necessary.
“Just got back from the Crow Club. Took one hundred kruge off the house
in just two hours.”
“You don’t say!”
“I do! Just came up the Stave to get a beer and meet a friend. Why don’t
you join us, and we’ll all go together?”
“The Crow Club! Who would have thought it?”
“Come on, I’ll buy you a drink. I’ll buy everyone a drink!”
And they walked off together laughing, leaving all the patrons around them
to wonder if maybe they ought to head just a few bridges down the canal
and see if the odds weren’t kinder there – Kaz’s servant, greed, luring them
south like a piper with flute in hand.
He made sure to cycle steerers in and out, changing the faces so Pekka’s
barkers and bouncers never got wise, and customer by customer, he leeched
away the Emerald’s business. It was one of the infinite tiny ways he’d
found to make himself strong at Pekka’s expense – intercepting his
shipments of jurda, charging him fees for access to Fifth Harbour,
undercutting his rents to keep his properties free of tenants, and slowly,
slowly tugging at the threads that made up his life.
Despite the lies he’d spread and the claims he’d made to Geels tonight, Kaz
wasn’t a bastard. He wasn’t even from Ketterdam. He’d been nine and
Jordie thirteen when they’d first arrived in the city, a cheque from the sale
of their father ’s farm sewn safely into the inner pocket of Jordie’s old coat.
Kaz could see himself as he was then, walking the Stave with dazzled eyes,
hand tucked into Jordie’s so he wouldn’t be swept away by the crowd. He
hated the boys they’d been, two stupid pigeons waiting to be plucked. But
those boys were long gone, and only Pekka Rollins was left to punish.
One day Rollins would come to Kaz on his knees, begging for help. If Kaz
managed this job for
Van Eck, that day would come much sooner than he ever could have hoped.
Brick by brick, I will destroy you.
But if Kaz had any hope of getting into the Ice Court, he needed the right
crew, and the next hour ’s business would bring him a step closer to
securing two very vital pieces of the puzzle.
He turned onto a walkway bordering one of the smaller canals. The tourists
and merchers liked to keep to well-lit thoroughfares, so the foot traffic here
was sparser, and he made better time. Soon, the lights and music of West
Stave came into view, the canal choked with men and women of every class
and country seeking diversion.
Music floated out of parlours where the doors had been flung open, and
men and women lounged
on couches in little more than scraps of silk and gaudy baubles. Acrobats
dangled from cords over the canal, lithe bodies garbed in nothing but glitter,
while street performers played their fiddles, hoping to garner a coin or two
from passersby. Hawkers shouted at the sleek private gondels of rich
merchers in the canal and the larger browboats that brought tourists and
sailors inland from the Lid.
A lot of tourists never entered the brothels of West Stave. They just came to
watch the crowd, which was a sight in itself. Many people chose to visit this
part of the Barrel in disguise – in veils or masks or capes with nothing but
the glint of their eyes visible. They bought their costumes in one of the
speciality shops off the main canals, and sometimes disappeared from their
companions for a day or a week, or however long their funds held out. They
dressed as Mister Crimson or the Lost Bride, or wore the grotesque, goggleeyed mask of the Madman – all characters from the Komedie Brute.
And then there were the Jackals, a group of rowdy men and boys who
cavorted through the Barrel in the red lacquered masks of Suli ‘fortunetellers’.
Kaz remembered when Inej had first seen the jackal masks in a shop
window. She hadn’t been able to contain her contempt. “Real Suli fortunetellers are rare. They’re holy men and women. These masks that are handed
around like party favours are sacred symbols.”
“I’ve seen Suli tellers ply their trade in caravans and pleasure ships, Inej.
They didn’t seem so very holy.”
“They are pretenders. Making themselves clowns for you and your ilk.”
“My ilk?” Kaz had laughed.
She’d waved her hand in disgust. “Shevrati,” she’d said. “Know-nothings.
They’re laughing at you behind those masks.”
“Not at me, Inej. I’d never lay down good coin to be told my future by
anyone – fraud or holy man.”
“Fate has plans for us all, Kaz.”
“Was it fate that took you from your family and stuck you in a pleasure
house in Ketterdam? Or was it just very bad luck?”
“I’m not sure yet,” she’d said coldly.
In moments like that, he thought she might hate him.
Kaz wove his way through the crowd, a shadow in a riot of colour. Each of
the major pleasure houses had a speciality, some more obvious than others.
He passed the Blue Iris, the Bandycat, bearded men glowering from the
windows of the Forge, the Obscura, the Willow Switch, the dewy-eyed
blondes at the House of Snow, and of course the Menagerie, also known as
the House of Exotics, where Inej had been forced to don fake Suli silks. He
spotted Tante Heleen in her peacock feathers and famous diamond choker
holding court in the gilded parlour. She ran the Menagerie, procured the
girls, made sure they behaved. When she saw Kaz, her lips thinned to a sour
line, and she lifted her glass, the gesture more threat than toast. He ignored
her and pressed on.
The House of the White Rose was one of the more luxurious establishments
on West Stave. It had its own dock, and its gleaming white stone façade
looked less like a pleasure house than a mercher mansion. Its window boxes
were always bursting with climbing white roses, and their scent clung dense
and sweet over this portion of the canal.
The parlour was even stickier with perfume. Huge alabaster vases
overflowed with more white roses, and men and women – some masked or
veiled, some with faces bare – waited on ivory couches, sipping nearcolourless wine and nibbling little vanilla cakes soaked in almond liqueur.
The boy at the desk was dressed in a creamy velvet suit, a white rose in his
buttonhole. He had white hair and eyes the colour of boiled eggs. Barring
the eyes, he looked like an albino, but Kaz happened to know that he’d been
tailored to match the decor of the House by a certain Grisha on the payroll.
“Mister Brekker,” the boy said, “Nina is with a client.”
Kaz nodded and slipped down a hallway behind a potted rose tree, resisting
the urge to bury his nose in his collar. Onkle Felix, the bawd who ran the
White Rose, liked to say that his house girls were as sweet as his blossoms.
But the joke was on the clients. That particular breed of white rose, the only
one hardy enough to survive the wet weather of Ketterdam, had no natural
scent. All the flowers were perfumed by hand.
Kaz trailed his fingers along the panels behind the potted tree and pressed
his thumb into a notch in the wall. It slid open, and he climbed a corkscrew
staircase that was only used by staff.
Nina’s room was on the third floor. The door to the bedroom beside it was
open and the room unoccupied, so Kaz slipped in, moved aside a still life,
and pressed his face to the wall. The peepholes were a feature of all the
brothels. They were a way to keep employees safe and honest, and they
offered a thrill to anyone who enjoyed watching others take their pleasure.
Kaz had seen enough slum dwellers seeking satisfaction in dark corners and
alleys that the allure was lost on him. Besides, he knew that anyone looking
through this particular peephole and hoping for excitement would be sorely
disappointed.
A little bald man was seated fully clothed at a round table draped in ivory
baize, his hands neatly folded beside an untouched silver coffee tray. Nina
Zenik stood behind him, swathed in the red silk kefta that advertised her
status as a Grisha Heartrender, one palm pressed to his forehead, the other
to the back of his neck. She was tall and built like the figurehead of a ship
carved by a generous hand.
They were silent, as if they’d been frozen there at the table. There wasn’t
even a bed in the room, just a narrow settee where Nina curled up every
night.
When Kaz had asked Nina why, she’d simply said, “I don’t want anyone
getting ideas.”
“A man doesn’t need a bed to get ideas, Nina.”
Nina fluttered her lashes. “What would you know about it, Kaz? Take those
gloves off, and we’ll see what ideas come to mind.”
Kaz had kept his cool eyes on her until she’d dropped her gaze. He wasn’t
interested in flirting with Nina Zenik, and he happened to know she wasn’t
remotely interested in him. Nina just liked to flirt with everything. He’d
once seen her make eyes at a pair of shoes she fancied in a shop window.
Nina and the bald man sat, unspeaking, as the minutes ticked by, and when
the hour on the clock chimed, he rose and kissed her hand.
“Go,” she said in solemn tones. “Be at peace.”
The bald man kissed her hand again, tears in his eyes. “Thank you.”
As soon as the client was down the hall, Kaz stepped out of the bedroom
and knocked on Nina’s
door.
She opened it cautiously, keeping the chain latched. “Oh,” she said when
she saw Kaz. “You.”
She didn’t look particularly happy to see him. No surprise. Kaz Brekker at
your door was rarely a good thing. She unhooked the chain and let him
show himself in as she shucked off the red kefta, revealing a slip of satin so
thin it barely counted as cloth.
“Saints, I hate this thing,” she said, kicking the kefta away and pulling a
threadbare dressing gown from a drawer.
“What’s wrong with it?” Kaz asked.
“It isn’t made right. And it itches.” The kefta was of Kerch manufacture, not
Ravkan – a costume, not a uniform. Kaz knew Nina never wore it on the
streets; it was simply too risky for Grisha. Her membership in the Dregs
meant anyone acting against her would risk retribution from the gang, but
payback wouldn’t matter much to Nina if she was on a slaver ship bound
for who knew where.
Nina threw herself into a chair at the table and wriggled her feet out of her
jewelled slippers, digging her toes into the plush white carpet. “Ahhh,” she
said contentedly. “So much better.” She shoved one of the cakes from the
coffee service into her mouth and mumbled, “What do you want, Kaz?”
“You have crumbs on your cleavage.”
“Don’t care,” she said, taking another bite of cake. “So hungry.”
Kaz shook his head, amused and impressed at how quickly Nina dropped
the wise Grisha priestess act. She’d missed her true calling on the stage.
“Was that Van Aakster, the merch?” Kaz asked.
“Yes.”
“His wife died a month ago, and his business has been a wreck since. Now
that he’s visiting you, can we expect a turnaround?”
Nina didn’t need a bed because she specialised in emotions. She dealt in
joy, calm, confidence.
Most Grisha Corporalki focused on the body – to kill or to cure – but Nina
had needed a job that would keep her in Ketterdam and out of trouble. So
instead of risking her life and making major money as a mercenary, she
slowed heartbeats, eased breathing, relaxed muscles. She had a lucrative
side business as a Tailor, seeing to the wrinkles and jowls of the wealthy
Kerch, but her chief source of income came from altering moods. People
came to her lonely, grieving, sad for no reason, and left buoyed, their
anxieties eased. The effect didn’t last long, but sometimes just the illusion
of happiness was enough to make her clients feel like they could face
another day. Nina claimed it had something to do with glands, but Kaz
didn’t care about the specifics as long as she showed up when he needed her
and she paid Per Haskell his percentage on time.
“I expect you’ll see a change,” Nina said. She finished off the last cake,
licking her fingers with relish, then set the tray outside the door and rang for
a maid. “Van Aakster started coming at the end of last week and has been
here every day since.”
“Excellent.” Kaz made a mental note to buy up some of the low stock in
Van Aakster ’s company.
Even if the man’s mood shift was the result of Nina’s handiwork, business
would pick up. He hesitated then said, “You make him feel better, ease his
woe and all that … but could you compel him to do something? Maybe
make him forget his wife?”
“Alter the pathways in his mind? Don’t be absurd.”
“The brain is just another organ,” Kaz said, quoting Van Eck.
“Yes, but it’s an incredibly complex one. Controlling or altering another
person’s thoughts …
well, it’s not like lowering a pulse rate or releasing a chemical to improve
someone’s mood. There are too many variables. No Grisha is capable of it.”
Yet, Kaz amended. “So you treat the symptom, not the cause.”
She shrugged. “He’s avoiding the grief, not treating it. If I’m his solution,
he’ll never really get over her death.”
“Will you send him on his way then? Advise him to find a new wife and
stop darkening your door?”
She ran a brush through her light brown hair and glanced at him in the
mirror. “Does Per Haskell have plans to forgive my debt?”
“None at all.”
“Well then Van Aakster must be allowed to grieve in his own way. I have
another client scheduled in a half hour, Kaz. What business?”
“Your client will wait. What do you know about jurda parem?”
Nina shrugged. “There are rumours, but they sound like nonsense to me.”
With the exception of the Council of Tides, the few Grisha working in
Ketterdam all knew each other and exchanged information readily. Most
were on the run from something, eager to avoid drawing the attention of
slavers or interest from the Ravkan government.
“They aren’t just rumours.”
“Squallers flying? Tidemakers turning to mist?”
“Fabrikators making gold from lead.” He reached into his pocket and tossed
the lump of yellow to her. “It’s real.”
“Fabrikators make textiles. They fuss around with metals and fabrics. They
can’t turn one thing into another.” She held the lump up to the light. “You
could have got this anywhere,” she said, just as he had argued to Van Eck a
few hours earlier.
Without being invited, Kaz sat down on the plush settee and stretched out
his bad leg. “Jurda parem is real, Nina, and if you’re still the good little
Grisha soldier I think you are, you’ll want to hear what it does to people
like you.”
She turned the lump of gold over her in her hands, then wrapped her
dressing gown more tightly around her and curled up at the end of the
settee. Again, Kaz marvelled at the transformation. In these rooms, she
played the part her clients wanted to see – the powerful Grisha, serene in
her knowledge.
But sitting there with her brow furrowed and her feet tucked under her, she
looked like what she truly was: a girl of seventeen, raised in the sheltered
luxury of the Little Palace, far from home and barely getting by every day.
“Tell me,” she said.
Kaz talked. He held back on the specifics of Van Eck’s proposal, but he told
her about Bo Yul-Bayur, jurda parem, and the addictive properties of the
drug, placing particular emphasis on the recent theft of Ravkan military
documents.
“If this is all true, then Bo Yul-Bayur needs to be eliminated.”
“That is not the job, Nina.”
“This isn’t about money, Kaz.”
It was always about money. But Kaz knew a different kind of pressure was
required. Nina loved her country and loved her people. She still believed in
the future of Ravka and in the Second Army, the Grisha military elite that
had nearly disintegrated during the civil war. Nina’s friends back in Ravka
believed she was dead, a victim of Fjerdan witchhunters, and for now, she
wanted it to stay that way.
But Kaz knew she hoped to return one day.
“Nina, we’re going to retrieve Bo Yul-Bayur, and I need a Corporalnik to do
it. I want you on my crew.”
“Wherever he’s hiding out, once you find him, letting him live would be the
most outrageous kind of irresponsibility. My answer is no.”
“He isn’t hiding out. The Fjerdans have him at the Ice Court.”
Nina paused. “Then he’s as good as dead.”
“The Merchant Council doesn’t think so. They wouldn’t be going to this
trouble or offering up this kind of reward if they thought he’d been
neutralised. Van Eck was worried. I could see it.”
“The mercher you spoke to?”
“Yes. He claims their intelligence is good. If it’s not, well, I’ll take the hit.
But if Bo Yul-Bayur is alive, someone is going to try to break him out of the
Ice Court. Why shouldn’t it be us?”
“The Ice Court,” Nina repeated, and Kaz knew she’d begun to put the
pieces together. “You don’t just need a Corporalnik, do you?”
“No. I need someone who knows the Court inside and out.”
She leaped to her feet and began pacing, hands on hips, dressing gown
flapping. “You’re a little skiv, you know that? How many times have I come
to you, begging you to help Matthias? And now
that you want something …”
“Per Haskell isn’t running a charity.”
“Don’t put this on the old man,” she snapped. “If you’d wanted to help me,
you know you could have.”
“And why would I do that?”
She whirled on him. “Because … because …”
“When have I ever done something for nothing, Nina?”
She opened her mouth, closed it again.
“Do you know how many favours I would have had to call in? How many
bribes I’d have had to
pay out to get Matthias Helvar out of prison? The price was too high.”
“And now?” she managed, her eyes still blazing anger.
“Now, Helvar ’s freedom is worth something.”
“It—”
He held up a hand to cut her off. “Worth something to me.”
Nina pressed her fingers to her temples. “Even if you could get to him,
Matthias would never agree to help you.”
“It’s just a question of leverage, Nina.”
“You don’t know him.”
“Don’t I? He’s a person like any other, driven by greed and pride and pain.
You should understand that better than anyone.”
“Helvar is driven by honour and only honour. You can’t bribe or bully that.”
“That may have been true once, Nina, but it’s been a very long year. Helvar
is much changed.”
“You’ve seen him?” Her green eyes were wide, eager. There, thought Kaz,
the Barrel hasn’t beaten the hope out of you yet.
“I have.”
Nina took a deep, shuddering breath. “He wants his revenge, Kaz.”
“That’s what he wants, not what he needs,” said Kaz. “Leverage is all about
knowing the difference.”
The sick feeling in Nina’s stomach had nothing to do with the rocking of
the rowboat. She tried to breathe deeply, to focus on the lights of the
Ketterdam harbour disappearing behind them and the steady splash of the
oars in the water. Beside her, Kaz adjusted his mask and cloak, while
Muzzen rowed with relentless and aggressive speed, driving them closer to
Terrenjel, one of Kerch’s tiny outlying islands, closer to Hellgate and
Matthias.
Fog lay low over the water, damp and curling. It carried the smell of tar and
machinery from the shipyards on Imperjum, and something else – the sweet
stink of burning bodies from the Reaper ’s Barge, where Ketterdam
disposed of the dead who couldn’t afford to be buried in the cemeteries
outside the city. Disgusting, Nina thought, drawing her cloak tighter around
her. Why anyone would want to live in a city like this was beyond her.
Muzzen hummed happily as he rowed. Nina knew him only in passing – a
bouncer and an enforcer,
like the ill-fated Big Bolliger. She avoided the Slat and the Crow Club as
much as possible. Kaz had branded her a snob for it, but she didn’t much
care what Kaz Brekker had to say about her tastes. She glanced back at
Muzzen’s huge shoulders. She wondered if Kaz had just brought him along
to row or because he expected trouble tonight.
Of course there will be trouble. They were breaking into a prison. It wasn’t
going to be a party. So why are we dressed for one?
She’d met Kaz and Muzzen at Fifth Harbour at midnight, and when she’d
boarded the little rowboat, Kaz had handed her a blue silk cape and a
matching veil – the trappings of the Lost Bride, one of the costumes
pleasure seekers liked to don when they sampled the excesses of the Barrel.
He’d had on a big orange cape with a Madman’s mask perched atop his
head; Muzzen had worn the same.
All they needed was a stage, and they could perform one of those dark,
savage little scenes from the Komedie Brute that the Kerch seemed to find
so hilarious.
Now Kaz gave her a nudge. “Lower your veil.” He pulled down his own
mask; the long nose and
bulging eyes looked doubly monstrous in the fog.
She was about to give in and ask why the costumes were necessary when
she realised that they weren’t alone. Through the shifting mists, she caught
sight of other boats moving through the water, carrying the shapes of other
Madmen, other Brides, a Mister Crimson, a Scarab Queen. What business
did these people have at Hellgate?
Kaz had refused to tell her the specifics of his plan, and when she’d
insisted, he’d simply said, “Get in the boat.” That was Kaz all over. He
knew he didn’t have to tell her anything because the lure of Matthias’
freedom had already overridden every bit of her good sense. She’d been
trying to talk Kaz into breaking Matthias out of jail for the better part of a
year. Now he could offer Matthias more than freedom, but the price would
be far higher than she had expected.
Only a few lights were visible as they approached the rocky shoal of
Terrenjel. The rest was darkness and crashing waves.
“Couldn’t you just bribe the warden?” she muttered to Kaz.
“I don’t need him knowing he has something I want.”
When the boat’s hull scraped sand, two men rushed forward to haul them
further onto land. The other boats she’d seen were making ground in the
same cove, being pulled ashore by more grunting and cursing men. Their
features were vague through the gauze of her veil, but Nina glimpsed the
tattoos on their forearms: a feral cat curled into a crown – the symbol of the
Dime Lions.
“Money,” one of them said as they clambered out of the boat.
Kaz handed over a stack of kruge and once it was counted, the Dime Lion
waved them on.
They followed a row of torches up an uneven path to the leeward side of the
prison. Nina tilted her head back to gaze at the high black towers of the
fortress known as Hellgate, a dark fist of stone thrusting up from the sea.
She’d seen it from afar before, when she’d paid a fisherman to take her out
to the island. But when she’d asked him to bring her closer, he’d refused.
“Sharks get mean there,”
he’d claimed. “Bellies full of convict blood.” Nina shuddered at the
memory.
A door had been propped open, and another member of the Dime Lions led
Nina and the others inside. They entered a dark, surprisingly clean kitchen,
its walls lined with huge vats that looked better suited to laundry than
cooking. The room smelled strange, like vinegar and sage. Like a mercher’s
kitchen, Nina thought. The Kerch believed that work was akin to prayer.
Maybe the merchant wives came here to scrub the floors and walls and
windows, to honour Ghezen, the god of industry and commerce, with soap
and water and the chafing of their hands. Nina resisted the urge to gag.
They could scrub all they liked. Beneath that wholesome scent was the
indelible stench of mildew, urine, and unwashed bodies. It might take an
actual miracle to dislodge it.
They passed through a dank entry hall, and she thought they would head up
into the cells, but instead they passed through another door and onto a high
stone walkway that connected the main prison to what looked like another
tower.
“Where are we going?” Nina whispered. Kaz didn’t answer. The wind
picked up, lifting her veil and lashing her cheeks with salt spray.
As they entered the second tower, a figure emerged from the shadows, and
Nina barely stifled a scream.
“Inej,” she said on a wavering breath. The Suli girl wore the horns and
high-necked tunic of the Grey Imp, but Nina recognised her anyway. No
one else moved liked that, as if the world were smoke and she was just
passing through it.
“How did you even get here?” Nina whispered to her.
“I came earlier on a supply barge.”
Nina ground her teeth. “Do people just come and go from Hellgate for
fun?”
“Once a week they do,” said Inej, her little imp horns bobbing along with
her head.
“What do you mean once a—”
“Keep quiet,” Kaz growled.
“Don’t shush me, Brekker,” Nina whispered furiously. “If it’s this easy to
get into Hellgate—”
“The problem isn’t getting in, it’s getting out. Now shut up and stay alert.”
Nina swallowed her anger. She had to trust Kaz to run the game. He’d made
sure she didn’t have any other choice.
They entered a tight passageway. This tower felt different from the first,
older, its rough-hewn stone walls blackened by smoking torches. Their
Dime Lion guide pushed open a heavy iron door and gestured for them to
follow him down a steep staircase. Here the smell of bodies and refuse was
worse, trapped by the sweating moisture of salt water.
They spiralled lower, into the bowels of the rock. Nina clung to the wall.
There was no banister, and though she could not see the bottom, she
doubted the fall would be kind. They didn’t go far, but by the time they
reached their destination, she was trembling, her muscles wound taut, less
from exertion than the knowledge that Matthias was somewhere in this
terrible place. He is here. He is under this roof.
“Where are we?” she whispered as they ducked through cramped stone
tunnels, passing dark caves fitted with iron bars.
“This is the old prison,” Kaz said. “When they built the new tower, they left
this one standing.”
She heard moaning from inside one of the cells.
“They still keep prisoners here?”
“Only the worst of them.”
She peered between the bars of an empty cell. There were shackles on the
wall, dark with rust and what might have been blood.
Through the walls, a sound reached Nina’s ears, a steady pounding. She
thought it was the ocean at first, but then she realised it was chanting. They
emerged into a curving tunnel. To her right were more old cells, but light
poured into the tunnel from staggered archways on the left, and through
them she glimpsed a roaring, rowdy crowd.
The Dime Lion led them around the tunnel to the third archway, where a
prison guard dressed in a blue-and-grey uniform was posted, rifle slung
across his back. “Four more for you,” the Dime Lion shouted over the
crowd. Then he turned to Kaz. “If you need to leave, the guard will call for
an escort.
No one goes wandering off without a guide, understood?”
“Of course, of course, wouldn’t dream of it,” Kaz said from behind his
ridiculous mask.
“Enjoy,” the Dime Lion said with an ugly grin. The prison guard waved
them through.
Nina stepped under the arch and felt as if she’d fallen into some strange
nightmare. They were on a jutting stone ledge, looking down into a shallow,
crudely made amphitheatre. The tower had been gutted to create an arena.
Only the black walls of the old prison remained, the roof long since fallen
in or destroyed so that the night sky was visible high above, dense with
clouds and free of stars. It was like standing in the hollowed-out trunk of a
massive tree, something long dead and howling with echoes.
Around her, masked and veiled men and women crowded onto the terraced
ledges, stamping their
feet as the action proceeded below. The walls surrounding the fighting pit
blazed with torchlight and the sand of the arena floor was red and damp
where it had soaked up blood.
In front of the dark mouth of a cave, a scrawny, bearded man in shackles
stood next to a big wooden wheel marked with what looked like drawings
of little animals. He’d clearly once been strong, but now his skin hung in
loose folds and his muscles sagged. A younger man stood beside him in a
mangy cape made from a lion’s skin, his face framed by the big cat’s
mouth. A garish gold crown had been secured between the lion’s ears, and
its eyes had been replaced with bright silver dimes.
“Spin the wheel!” the young man commanded.
The prisoner lifted his shackled hands and gave the wheel a hard spin. A red
needle ticked along the edges as it spun, making a cheerful clattering noise,
then slowly the wheel came to a stop. Nina couldn’t quite make out the
symbol, but the crowd bellowed, and the man’s shoulders drooped as a
guard came forward to unlock his chains.
The prisoner cast them aside into the sand, and a second later Nina heard it
– a roar that carried even over the excited baying of the crowd. The man in
the lion cape and the prison guard stepped hurriedly onto a rope ladder and
were lifted out of the pit to the safety of a ledge as the prisoner seized a
flimsy-looking knife from a bloody bunch of weapons lying in the sand. He
backed as far away from the mouth of the tunnel as he could get.
Nina had never seen a creature like the one that crawled into view from the
tunnel. It was some kind of reptile, its thick body covered in grey-green
scales, its head wide and flat, its yellow eyes slitted. It moved slowly,
sinuously, its low-slung body sliding lazily over the ground. There was a
white crust around the broad crescent of its mouth, and when it opened its
jaws to roar again, something wet, white, and foaming dripped from its
pointed teeth.
“What is that thing?” Nina asked.
“Rinca moten,” said Inej. “A desert lizard. The poison from its mouth is
lethal.”
“It seems pretty slow on its feet.”
“Yes. It seems that way.”
The prisoner lunged forward with his knife. The big lizard moved so
quickly Nina could barely
track it. One moment the prisoner was bearing down on it; the next, the
lizard was on the other side of the arena. Bare seconds later, it had slammed
into the prisoner, pinning him to the ground as he screamed, its poison
dripping over his face, leaving smoky trails wherever it touched his skin.
The creature dropped its weight on the prisoner with a sickening crunch and
set about slowly mauling his shoulder as he lay there shrieking.
The crowd was booing.
Nina averted her eyes, unable to watch. “What is this?”
“Welcome to the Hellshow,” said Kaz. “Pekka Rollins got the idea a few
years back and pitched it to the right Council member.”
“The Merchant Council knows?”
“Of course they know, Nina. There’s money to be made here.”
Nina dug her fingernails into her palms. That condescending tone made Kaz
so slappable.
She knew Pekka Rollins’ name well. He was the reigning king of the
Barrel, the owner of not one but two gambling palaces – one luxurious, the
other catering to sailors with less to line their pockets
– and several of the higher-end brothels. When Nina had arrived in
Ketterdam a year ago, she’d been friendless, penniless, and far from home.
She’d spent the first week in the Kerch law courts, dealing with the charges
against Matthias. But once her testimony was complete, she’d been
unceremoniously dumped at First Harbour with just enough money to book
passage back to Ravka. Desperate as she’d been to return to her country,
she’d known she couldn’t leave Matthias to languish in Hellgate.
She had no idea what to do, but it seemed rumours of a new Grisha
Corporalnik in Ketterdam had already circulated through the city. Pekka
Rollins’ men had been waiting for her at the harbour with the promise of
safety and a place to stay. They’d taken her to the Emerald Palace, where
Pekka himself had leaned heavily on Nina to join the Dime Lions and had
offered to set her up in business at the Sweet Shop. She’d been close to
saying yes, desperate for cash and terrified of the slavers who patrolled the
streets. But that night, Inej had crawled through her window on the top floor
of the Emerald Palace with a proposal from Kaz Brekker in hand.
Nina never could figure out how Inej had managed to scale six rain-slick
storeys of stone in the middle of the night, but the Dregs’ terms were far
more favourable than those offered by Pekka and the Dime Lions. It was a
contract that she might actually pay off in a year or two if she was smart
with her money. And Kaz had sent the right person to argue his case – a
Suli girl just a few months younger than Nina who had grown up in Ravka
and who had spent a very ugly year indentured at the Menagerie.
“What can you tell me about Per Haskell?” Nina had asked that night.
“Not much,” Inej had admitted. “He’s no better or worse than most of the
bosses in the Barrel.”
“And Kaz Brekker?”
“A liar, a thief, and utterly without conscience. But he’ll keep to any deal
you strike with him.”
Nina had heard the conviction in her voice. “He freed you from the
Menagerie?”
“There is no freedom in the Barrel, only good terms. Tante Heleen’s girls
never earn out of their contracts. She makes sure they don’t. She—” Inej
had broken off then, and Nina had sensed the vibrant anger coursing
through her. “Kaz convinced Per Haskell to pay off my indenture. I would
have died at the Menagerie.”
“You may still die in the Dregs.”
Inej’s dark eyes had glinted. “I may. But I’ll die on my feet with a knife in
my hand.”
The next morning, Inej had helped Nina sneak out of the Emerald Palace.
They’d met with Kaz Brekker, and despite his cold ways and those strange
leather gloves, she’d agreed to join the Dregs and work out of the White
Rose. Less than two days later, a girl died at the Sweet Shop, strangled in
her bed by a customer dressed as Mister Crimson who was never found.
Nina had trusted Inej, and she hadn’t been sorry for it, though right now she
just felt furious with everyone. She watched a group of Dime Lions prod
the desert lizard with long spears. Apparently, the monster was sated after
its meal; it allowed itself to be herded back to the tunnel, its thick body
moving side to side in a lazy, sinuous roll.
The crowd continued to boo as guards entered the arena to remove the
prisoner ’s remains, tendrils of smoke still curling from his ruined flesh.
“Why are they complaining?” Nina asked angrily. “Isn’t this what they
came here for?”
“They wanted a fight,” said Kaz. “They were expecting him to last longer.”
“This is disgusting.”
Kaz shrugged. “Only disgusting thing about it is that I didn’t think of it
first.”
“These men aren’t slaves, Kaz. They’re prisoners.”
“They’re murderers and rapists.”
“And thieves and con artists. Your people.”
“Nina, sweet, they aren’t forced to fight. They line up for the chance. They
earn better food, private cells, liquor, jurda, conjugals with girls from West
Stave.”
Muzzen cracked his knuckles. “Sounds better than we got it at the Slat.”
Nina looked at the people screaming and shouting, the barkers walking the
aisles taking bets. The prisoners of Hellgate might line up to fight, but
Pekka Rollins made the real money.
“Helvar doesn’t … Helvar doesn’t fight in the arena, does he?”
“We aren’t here for the ambience,” Kaz said.
Beyond slappable. “Are you aware that I could waggle my fingers and
make you wet your trousers?”
“Easy, Heartrender. I like these trousers. And if you start messing with my
vital organs, Matthias Helvar will never see sunshine again.”
Nina blew out a breath and settled for glowering at no one.
“Nina—” Inej murmured.
“Don’t you start on me.”
“It will all work out. Let Kaz do what he does best.”
“He’s horrible.”
“But effective. Being angry at Kaz for being ruthless is like being angry at a
stove for being hot.
You know what he is.”
Nina crossed her arms. “I’m mad at you, too.”
“Me? Why?”
“I don’t know yet. I just am.”
Inej gave Nina’s hand a brief squeeze, and after a moment, Nina squeezed
back. She sat through the next fight in a daze, and the next. She told herself
she was ready for this – to see him again, to see him here in this brutal
place. After all, she was a Grisha and a soldier of the Second Army. She’d
seen worse.
But when Matthias emerged from the mouth of the cave below, she knew
she’d been wrong. Nina
recognised him instantly. Every night of the past year, she had fallen asleep
thinking of Matthias’ face.
There was no mistaking the gilded brows, the sharp cut of his cheekbones.
But Kaz hadn’t lied: Matthias was much changed. The boy who looked
back at the crowd with fury in his eyes was a stranger.
Nina remembered the first time she’d seen Matthias in a moonlit Kaelish
wood. His beauty had seemed unfair to her. In another life, she might have
believed he was coming to rescue her, a shining saviour with golden hair
and eyes the pale blue of northern glaciers. But she’d known the truth of
him by the language he spoke, and by the disgust on his face every time his
eyes lighted on her. Matthias Helvar was a drüskelle, one of the Fjerdan
witchhunters tasked with hunting down Grisha to face trial and execution,
though to her he’d always resembled a warrior Saint, illuminated in gold.
Now he looked like what he truly was: a killer. His bare torso seemed hewn
from steel, and though she knew it wasn’t possible, he seemed bigger, as if
the very structure of his body had changed. His skin had been gilded honey;
now it was fish-belly white beneath the grime. And his hair – he’d had such
beautiful hair, thick and golden, worn long in the way of Fjerdan soldiers.
Now, like the other prisoners, his head had been shaved, probably to
prevent lice. Whichever guard had done it had made a mess of the job. Even
from this distance, she could see the cuts and nicks on his scalp, and little
strips of blond stubble in the places the razor had missed. And yet, he was
beautiful still.
He glared at the crowd and gave the wheel a hard spin that nearly knocked
it off its base.
Tick tick tick tick. Snakes. Tiger. Bear. Boar. The wheel ticked merrily
along, then slowed and finally stopped.
“No,” Nina said when she saw where the needle was pointing.
“It could be worse,” said Muzzen. “Could have landed on the desert lizard
again.”
She grabbed Kaz’s arm through his cloak and felt his muscles tense. “You
have to stop this.”
“Let go of me, Nina.” His gravel-rough voice was low, but she sensed real
menace in it.
She dropped her hand, “Please, you don’t understand. He—”
“If he survives, I’ll take Matthias Helvar out of this place tonight, but this
part is up to him.”
Nina gave a frustrated shake of her head. “You don’t get it.”
The guard unbolted Matthias’ shackles, and as soon as the chains dropped
into the sand, he leaped onto the ladder with the announcer to be lifted to
safety. The crowd screamed and stamped. But Matthias stood silent,
unmoving, even when the gate opened, even when the wolves charged out
of the tunnel – three of them snarling and snapping, tumbling over one
another to get to him.
At the last second, Matthias dropped into a crouch, knocking the first wolf
into the dirt, then rolling right to pick up the bloodied knife the previous
combatant had left in the sand. He sprang to his feet, blade held out before
him, but Nina could sense his reluctance. His head was cocked to one side,
and the look in his blue eyes was pleading, as if he was trying to engage the
two wolves circling him in some silent negotiation. Whatever the plea
might have been, it went unheard. The wolf on the right lunged. Matthias
crouched low and spun, lodging his knife in the wolf’s belly. It gave a
miserable yelp, and Matthias seemed to shudder at the sound. It cost him
precious seconds. The third wolf was on him, knocking him to the sand. Its
teeth sank into his shoulder. He rolled, taking the wolf with him. The wolf’s
jaws snapped, and Matthias caught them. He wrenched them apart, the
muscles of his arms flexing, his face grim. Nina squeezed her eyes shut.
There was a sickening crack. The crowd roared.
Matthias kneeled over the wolf. Its jaw was broken, and it lay on the ground
twitching in pain. He reached for a rock and slammed it hard into the poor
animal’s skull. It went still and Matthias’
shoulders slumped. The people howled, stomping their feet. Only Nina
knew what this was costing him, that he’d been a drüskelle. Wolves were
sacred to his kind, bred for battle like their enormous horses. They were
friends and companions, fighting side by side with their drüskelle masters.
The first wolf had recovered and was circling. Move, Matthias, she thought
desperately. He got to his feet, but his movements were slow, weary. His
heart wasn’t in this fight. His opponents were grey wolves, rangy and wild,
but cousins to the white wolves of the Fjerdan north. Matthias had no knife,
only the bloody rock in his hand, and the remaining wolf prowled the arena
between him and the pile of weapons. The wolf lowered its head and bared
its teeth.
Matthias dove left. The wolf lunged, sinking its teeth into his side. He
grunted, and hit the ground hard. For a moment, Nina thought he might
simply give in and let the wolf take his life. Then he reached out, hand
scrabbling through the sand, searching for something. His fingers closed
over the shackles that had bound his wrists.
He seized them, looped the chain across the wolf’s throat, and pulled, the
veins in his neck cording from the strain. His bloody face was pressed
against the wolf’s ruff, his eyes tightly shut, his lips moving. What was he
saying? A drüskelle prayer? A farewell?
The wolf’s hind legs scrabbled at the sand. Its eyes rolled, frightened whites
showing bright against its matted fur. A high whine rose from its chest. And
then it was over. The creature’s body stilled. Both fighters lay unmoving in
the sand. Matthias kept his eyes closed, his face still buried in the creature’s
fur.
The crowd thundered its approval. The ladder was lowered, and the
announcer sprang down, hauling Matthias to his feet and grabbing his wrist
to raise his hand in victory. The announcer gave him a little nudge, and
Matthias lifted his head. Nina caught her breath.
Tears streaked the dirt on Matthias’ face. The rage was gone, and it was like
some flame had gone out with it. His north sea eyes were colder than she’d
ever seen them, empty of feeling, stripped of anything human at all. This
was what Hellgate had done to him. And it was her fault.
The guards took hold of Matthias again, pulling the shackles from the
wolf’s throat and clapping them back on his wrists. As he was led away, the
crowd chanted its disapproval, clamouring “More!
More!”
“Where are they taking him?” Nina asked, voice trembling.
“To a cell to sleep off the fight,” Kaz said.
“Who will see to his injuries?”
“They have mediks. We’ll wait to make sure he’s alone.”
I could heal him, she thought. But a darker voice rose in her, rich with
mocking. Not even you can be that foolish, Nina. No Healer can cure that
boy. You made sure of it.
She thought she would leap from her skin as the minutes burned away. The
others watched the next fight – Muzzen avidly, flexing his fingers and
speculating on the outcome, Inej silent and still as a statue, Kaz inscrutable
as always, scheming away behind that hideous mask. Nina slowed her own
breathing, forced her pulse lower, trying to calm herself, but she could do
nothing to mute the riot in her head.
Finally, Kaz gave her a nudge. “Ready, Nina? The guard first.”
She cast a glance at the prison guard standing by the archway.
“How down?” It was a Barrel turn of phrase. How badly do you want him
hurt?
“Shut eye.” Knock him out, but don’t actually hurt him.
They followed Kaz to the arch through which they’d entered. The rest of
the crowd took little notice, eyes focused on the fighting below.
“Need your escort?” the guard asked as they approached.
“I had a question,” said Kaz. Beneath her cape, Nina lifted her hands,
sensing the flow of blood in the guard’s veins, the tissue of his lungs.
“About your mother and whether the rumours are true.”
Nina felt the guard’s pulse leap and sighed. “Never can make it easy, can
you, Kaz?”
The guard stepped forward, lifting his gun. “What did you say? I—” His
eyelids drooped. “You don’t—” Nina dropped his pulse, and he toppled
forward.
Muzzen grabbed him before he could fall as Inej swept him into the cloak
Kaz had been wearing
just moments before. Nina was only mildly surprised to see that Kaz was
wearing a prison guard’s uniform beneath it.
“Couldn’t you have just asked him the time or something?” Nina said. “And
where did you get that uniform?”
Inej slid the Madman’s mask down over the guard’s face, and Muzzen
threw his arm around him,
holding him up as if the guard had been drinking too much. They deposited
him on one of the benches pressed against the back wall.
Kaz tugged on the sleeves of his uniform. “Nina, people love to give up
authority to men in nice clothes. I have uniforms for the stadwatch, the
harbour police, and the livery of every merch mansion on the Geldstraat.
Let’s go.”
They slipped down the passageway.
Instead of turning back the way they’d come, they moved counterclockwise around the old tower, the wall of the arena vibrating with voices
and stomping feet to their left. The guards posted at each archway paid
them little more than a glance, though a few nodded at Kaz, who kept a
brisk pace, his face buried in his collar.
Nina was so deep in thought that she nearly missed it when Kaz held up a
hand for them to slow.
They’d rounded a bend between two archways and were in the cover of
deep shadow. Ahead of them, a medik was emerging from a cell
accompanied by guards, one carrying a lantern. “He’ll sleep through the
night,” the medik said. “Make sure he drinks something in the morning and
check his pupils. I had to give him a powerful sleeping draft.”
As the men moved off in the opposite direction, Kaz gestured his group
forward. The door in the rock was solid iron, broken only by a narrow slot
through which to pass the prisoner ’s meals. Kaz bent to the lock.
Nina eyed the crude iron door. “This place is barbaric.”
“Most of the better fighters sleep in the old tower,” Kaz replied. “Keeps
them away from the rest of the population.”
Nina glanced left and right to where bright light spilled from the arena
entryways. There were guards standing in those doorways, distracted
maybe, but all one needed to do was turn his head. If they were caught here,
would the guards bother giving them over to the stadwatch for trial or
would they simply force them into the ring to be eaten by a tiger? Maybe
something less dignified, she thought bleakly. A swarm of angry voles.
It took Kaz a few quick heartbeats to pick the lock. The door creaked open
and they slipped inside.
The cell was pitch-black. A brief moment passed, and the cold green glow
of a bonelight flickered to life beside her. Inej held the little glass sphere
aloft. The substance inside was made from the dried and crushed bodies of
luminous deep-sea fishes. They were common among crooks in the Barrel
who didn’t want to get caught in a dark alley, but couldn’t be bothered to
lug around lanterns.
At least it’s clean, Nina thought, as her eyes adjusted to the gloom. Barren
and icy cold, but not filthy. She saw a pallet of horse blankets and two
buckets placed against the wall, one with a bloody cloth peeking over the
rim.
This was what the men of Hellgate competed for: a private cell, a blanket,
clean water, a bucket for waste.
Matthias slept with his back to the wall. Even in the dim illumination of the
bonelight, she could see his face was starting to swell. Some kind of
ointment had been smeared over his wounds – calendula.
She recognised the smell.
Nina moved towards him, but Kaz stopped her with a hand on her arm. “Let
Inej assess the damage.”
“I can—” Nina began.
“I need you to work on Muzzen.”
Inej tossed Kaz the crow-headed cane she must have been hiding beneath
her Grey Imp costume,
and kneeled over Matthias’ body with the bonelight. Muzzen stepped
forward. He removed his cloak and shirt and the Madman’s mask. His head
was shaved, and he wore prison-issue trousers.
Nina looked at Matthias then back to Muzzen, grasping what Kaz had in
mind. The two boys were
about the same height and the same build, but that was where the
similarities ended.
“You can’t possibly mean for Muzzen to take Matthias’ place.”
“He isn’t here for his sparkling conversation,” Kaz replied. “You’ll need to
reproduce Helvar ’s injuries. Inej, what’s the inventory?”
“Bruised knuckles, chipped tooth, two broken ribs,” Inej said. “Third and
fourth on the left.”
“His left or your left?” Kaz asked.
“His left.”
“This isn’t going to work,” Nina said in frustration. “I can match the
damage to Helvar ’s body, but I’m not a good enough Tailor to make
Muzzen look like him.”
“Just trust me, Nina.”
“I wouldn’t trust you to tie my shoes without stealing the laces, Kaz.” She
peered at Muzzen’s face.
“Even if I swell him up, he’ll never pass.”
“Tonight, Matthias Helvar – or rather, our dear Muzzen – is going to appear
to contract firepox, the lupine strain, carried by wolves and dogs alike.
Tomorrow morning, when his guards discover him so covered in pustules
that he is unrecognisable, he will be quarantined for a month to see if he
survives the fever and to outwait the contagion. Meanwhile Matthias will be
with us. Get it?”
“You want me to make Muzzen look like he has firepox?”
“Yes, and do it quickly, Nina, because in about ten minutes, things are going
to get very hectic around here.”
Nina stared at him. What was Kaz planning? “No matter what I do to him, it
won’t last a month. I can’t give him a permanent fever.”
“My contact in the infirmary will make sure he stays sick enough. We just
need to get him through diagnosis. Now get to work.”
Nina looked Muzzen up and down. “This is going to hurt just as much as if
you’d been in the fight yourself,” she warned.
He scrunched up his face, bracing for the pain. “I can take it.”
She rolled her eyes, then lifted her hands, concentrating. With a sharp slice
of her right hand over her left, she snapped Muzzen’s ribs.
He let out a grunt and doubled over.
“That’s a good boy,” said Kaz. “Taking it like a champion. Knuckles next,
then face.”
Nina spread bruises and cuts over Muzzen’s knuckles and arms, matching
the wounds to Inej’s descriptions.
“I’ve never seen firepox up close,” Nina said. She was only familiar with
illustrations from books they’d used in their anatomy training at the Little
Palace.
“Count yourself lucky,” Kaz said grimly. “Hurry it up.”
She worked from memory, swelling and cracking the skin on Muzzen’s face
and chest, raising blisters until the swelling and pustules were so bad that he
was truly unrecognisable. The big man moaned.
“Why would you agree to do this?” Nina murmured.
The swollen flesh of Muzzen’s face quivered, and Nina thought he might be
trying to smile.
“Money was good,” he said thickly.
She sighed. Why else did anyone do anything in the Barrel? “Good enough
to get locked up in Hellgate?”
Kaz tapped his cane on the cell floor. “Stop making trouble, Nina. If Helvar
cooperates, he and Muzzen will both have their freedom just as soon as the
job is done.”
“And if he doesn’t?”
“Then Helvar gets locked back in his cell, and Muzzen still gets paid. And
I’ll take him to breakfast at the Kooperom.”
“Can I have waffles?” Muzzen mumbled.
“We’ll all have waffles. And whisky. If this job doesn’t come off, no one’s
going to want to be around me sober. Finished, Nina?”
Nina nodded, and Inej took her place to bandage Muzzen to look like
Matthias.
“All right,” said Kaz. “Get Helvar on his feet.”
Nina crouched beside Matthias as Kaz stood over her with the bonelight.
Even in sleep, Matthias’
features were troubled, his pale brows furrowed. She let her hands travel
over the bruised line of his jaw, resisting the urge to linger there.
“Not the face, Nina. I need him mobile, not pretty. Heal him fast and only
enough to get him walking for now. I don’t want him spry enough to vex
us.”
Nina lowered the blanket and went to work. Just another body, she told
herself. She was always getting late-night calls from Kaz to heal wounded
members of the Dregs who he didn’t want to bring around to any legitimate
medik – girls with stabbing punctures, boys with broken legs or bullets
lodged inside them, victims of a scuffle with the stadwatch or another gang.
Pretend it’s Muzzen, she told herself. Or Big Bolliger or some other fool.
You don’t know this boy. And it was true. The boy she knew might have
been the scaffold, but something new had been built upon it.
She touched his shoulder gently. “Helvar,” she said. He didn’t stir.
“Matthias.”
A lump rose in her throat, and she felt the ache of tears threatening. She
pressed a kiss to his temple. She knew that Kaz and the others were
watching and that she was making an idiot of herself, but after so long he
was finally here, in front of her, and so very broken. “Matthias,” she
repeated.
“Nina?” His voice was raw but as lovely as she remembered.
“Oh, Saints, Matthias,” she whispered. “Please wake up.”
His eyes opened, groggily, palest blue. “Nina,” he said softly. His knuckles
brushed her cheek; his rough hand cupped her face tentatively,
disbelievingly. “Nina?”
Her eyes filled with tears. “Shhhh, Matthias. We’re here to get you out.”
Before she could blink he had hold of her shoulders and had pinned her to
the ground.
“Nina,” he growled.
Then his hands closed over her throat.
PART 2
SERVANT AND LEVER
Matthias was dreaming again. Dreaming of her.
In all his dreams he hunted her, sometimes through the new green meadows
of spring, but usually through the ice fields, dodging boulders and crevasses
with unerring steps. Always he chased, and always he caught her.
In the good dreams, he slammed her to the ground and throttled her,
watching the life drain from her eyes, heart full of vengeance – finally,
finally. In the bad dreams, he kissed her. In these dreams, she didn’t fight
him. She laughed as if the chase was nothing but a game, as if she’d known
he would catch her, as if she’d wanted him to and there was no place she’d
rather be than beneath him. She was welcoming and perfect in his arms. He
kissed her, buried his face in the sweet hollow of her neck. Her curls
brushed his cheeks, and he felt that if he could just hold her a little longer,
every wound, every hurt, every bad thing would melt away.
“Matthias,” she would whisper, his name so soft on her lips. These were the
worst dreams, and when he woke, he hated himself almost as much as he
hated her. To know that he could betray himself, betray his country again
even in sleep, to know that – after everything she’d done – some sick part
of him still hungered after her … it was too much.
Tonight was a bad dream, very bad. She was wearing blue silk, clothes far
more luxurious than anything he’d ever seen her in; some kind of gauzy veil
was caught up in her hair, the lamplight glinting off of it like caught rain.
Djel, she smelled good. The mossy damp was still there, but perfume, too.
Nina loved luxury and this was expensive – roses and something else,
something his pauper ’s nose didn’t recognise. She pressed her soft lips to
his temple, and he could swear she was crying.
“Matthias.”
“Nina,” he managed.
“Oh, Saints, Matthias,” she whispered. “Please wake up.”
And then he was awake, and he knew he’d gone mad because she was here,
in his cell, kneeling beside him, her hand resting gently on his chest.
“Matthias, please.”
The sound of her voice, pleading with him. He’d dreamed of this.
Sometimes she pleaded for mercy. Sometimes there were other things she
begged for.
He reached up and touched her face. She had the softest skin. He’d laughed
at her for it once. No real soldier had skin like that, he’d told her –
pampered, coddled. He’d mocked the lushness of her body, ashamed of his
own response to her. He cupped the warm curve of her cheek, felt the soft
brush of her hair. So lovely. So real. It wasn’t fair.
Then he registered the bloody wrappings on his hands. Pain rushed at him
as he came fully awake
– cracked ribs, aching knuckles. He’d chipped a tooth. He wasn’t sure
when, but he’d cut his tongue against it at some point. His mouth still held
the coppery taste of blood. The wolves. They’d made him murder wolves.
He was awake.
“Nina?”
There were tears in her beautiful green eyes. Rage coursed through him.
She had no right to tears, no right to pity.
“Shhhh, Matthias. We’re here to get you out.”
What game was this? What new cruelty? He’d just learned to survive in this
monstrous place, and now she’d come to heap some fresh torture on him.
He launched himself forward, flipping her to the ground, hands fastened
tight around her throat, straddling her so that his knees pinned her arms to
the ground. He knew damn well that Nina with her hands free was a deadly
thing.
“Nina,” he gritted out. She clawed at his hands. “Witch,” he hissed, leaning
over her. He saw her eyes widen, her face getting redder. “Beg me,” he said.
“Beg me for your life.”
He heard a click, and a gravelly voice said, “Hands off her, Helvar.”
Someone behind him had pressed a gun to his neck. Matthias didn’t spare
him a glance. “Go ahead and shoot me,” he said. He dug his fingertips
deeper into Nina’s neck – nothing would deprive him of this. Nothing.
Traitor, witch, abomination. All those words came to him, but others
crowded in, too: beautiful, charmed one. Röed fetla, he’d called her, little
red bird, for the colour of her Grisha Order. The colour she loved. He
squeezed harder, silencing that weak-willed strain inside him.
“If you’ve actually lost your mind, this is going to be a lot tougher than I
thought,” said that raspy voice.
He heard a whoosh like something moving through the air, then a
wrenching pain shot through his left shoulder. It felt like he’d been punched
by a tiny fist, but his entire arm went numb. He grunted as he fell forward,
one hand still clamped around Nina’s throat. He would have fallen directly
onto her, but he was yanked backwards by the collar of his shirt.
A boy wearing a guard’s uniform stood before him, dark eyes glittering, a
pistol in one hand, a walking stick in the other. Its handle was carved to
look like a crow’s head, with a cruelly pointed beak.
“Get hold of yourself, Helvar. We’re here to break you out. I can do to your
leg what I did to your arm, and we can drag you out of here, or you can
leave like a man, on two feet.”
“No one gets out of Hellgate,” Matthias said.
“Tonight they do.”
Matthias sat forward, trying to get his bearings, clutching his dead arm.
“You can’t just walk me out of here. The guards will recognise me,” he
snarled. “I’m not losing fighting privileges to be carted off Djel knows
where with you.”
“You’ll be masked.”
“If the guards check—”
“They’re going to be too busy to check,” said the strange, pale boy. And
then the screaming started.
Matthias’ head jerked up. He heard the thunder of footsteps from the arena,
cresting like a wave as people burst into the passageway outside his cell. He
heard the shouts of guards, and then the roaring of a great cat, the trumpet
of an elephant.
“You opened the cages.” Nina’s voice was shaky with disbelief, though who
knew what might be
real or performance with her. He refused to look in her direction. If he did,
he’d lose all sense of reality. He was barely hanging on as it was.
“Jesper was supposed to wait until three bells,” said the pale boy.
“It is three bells, Kaz,” replied a small girl in the corner with dark hair and
deep bronze Suli skin.
A figure covered in welts and bandages was leaning against her.
“Since when is Jesper punctual?” the boy complained with a glance at his
watch. “On your feet, Helvar.”
He offered him a gloved hand. Matthias stared at it. This is a dream. The
strangest dream I’ve ever had, but definitely a dream. Or maybe killing the
wolves had finally driven him truly mad. He’d murdered family tonight. No
whispered prayers for their wild souls would make it right.
He looked up at the pale demon with his black-gloved hands. Kaz, she’d
called him. Would he lead Matthias out of this nightmare or just drag him
into another kind of hell? Choose, Helvar.
Matthias clasped the boy’s hand. If this was real and not illusion, he’d
escape whatever trap these creatures had set for him. He heard Nina release
a long breath – was she relieved? Exasperated? He shook his head. He
would deal with her later. The little bronze girl swept a cloak around
Matthias’
shoulders and propped an ugly, beak-nosed mask on his head.
The passageway outside the cell was chaos. Costumed men and women
surged past, screaming and
pushing each other, trying to get away from the arena. Guards had their
guns out, and he could hear shots being fired. He felt dizzy, and his side
ached badly. His left arm was still useless.
Kaz signalled towards the far right archway, indicating that they should
move against the flow of the crowd and into the arena. Matthias didn’t care.
He could plunge through the mob instead, force his way up that staircase
and onto a boat. And then what? It didn’t matter. There was no time for
planning.
He stepped into the throng and was instantly hauled back.
“Boys like you weren’t meant to get ideas, Helvar,” said Kaz. “That
staircase leads to a bottleneck.
You think the guards won’t check under that mask before they let you
through?”
Matthias scowled and followed the others through the crowd, Kaz’s hand at
his back.
If the passage had been chaos, then the arena was a special kind of
madness. Matthias glimpsed hyenas leaping and bounding over the ledges.
One was feeding over a body in a crimson cape. An elephant charged the
wall of the stadium, sending up a cloud of dust and bellowing its frustration.
He saw a white bear and one of the great jungle cats from the Southern
Colonies crouching in the eaves, its teeth bared. He knew there were snakes
in the cages as well. He could only hope that this Jesper character hadn’t
been foolish enough to set them free, too.
They plunged across the sands where Matthias had fought for privileges for
the last six months, but as they headed towards the tunnel, the desert lizard
came pounding towards them, its mouth dripping foaming white poison, its
fat tail lashing the ground. Before Matthias could think to move, the bronze
girl had vaulted over its back and dispatched the creature with two bright
daggers wedged beneath the armour of its scales. The lizard groaned and
collapsed on its side. Matthias felt a pang of sadness. It was a grotesque
creature, and he’d never seen a fighter survive its attack, but it was also a
living thing. You’ve never seen a fighter survive until now, he corrected
himself. The bronze girl’s daggers merit watching.
He’d assumed they’d cross the arena and head back up into the stands to
avoid the crowds clogging the passageway, possibly just storm the stairs
and hope to make it through the guards who must be waiting at the top.
Instead, Kaz led them down the tunnel past the cages. The cages were old
cells that had been turned over to whatever beasts the masters of the
Hellshow had got their hands on that week
– old circus animals, even diseased livestock in a pinch, creatures culled
from forest and countryside.
As they raced past the open doors, he glimpsed a pair of yellow eyes glaring
at him from the shadows, and then he was moving on. He cursed his
deadened arm and lack of weapon. He was virtually defenceless. Where is
this Kaz leading us? They wended past a wild boar feeding on a guard and a
spotted cat that hissed and spit at them but did not draw near.
And then, through the musk of animals and the stink of their waste, he
smelled the clean tang of salt water. He heard the rush of waves. He slipped
and discovered the stones beneath his feet were damp.
He was deeper in the tunnel than he’d ever been permitted to go. It must
lead to the sea. Whatever Nina and her people intended, they really were
taking him out of the bowels of Hellgate.
In the green light from the orbs carried by Kaz and the bronze girl, he
spotted a tiny boat moored up ahead. It looked like a guard was seated in it,
but he raised a hand and waved them forward.
“You were early, Jesper,” Kaz said as he nudged Matthias towards the boat.
“I was on time.”
“For you, that’s early. Next time you plan to impress me give me some
warning.”
“The animals are out, and I found you a boat. This is when a thank you
would be in order.”
“Thank you, Jesper,” said Nina.
“You’re very welcome, gorgeous. See, Kaz? That’s how the civilised folk
do.”
Matthias was only half listening. The fingers of his left hand had started to
tingle as sensation returned. He couldn’t fight all of them, not in this state
and not when they were armed. But Kaz and the boy in the boat, Jesper,
looked to be the only ones with guns. Unhook the rope, disable Jesper. He’d
have a gun and possession of the boat. And Nina can stop your heart before
you’ve taken hold of the oars, he reminded himself. So shoot her first. Put a
bullet in her heart. Stay long enough to watch her fall and then be done
with this place. He could do it. He knew he could. All he needed was a
distraction.
The bronze girl was standing just to his right. She barely reached his
shoulder. Even injured, he could knock her into the water without losing his
footing or doing her any real harm.
Drop the girl. Free the boat. Disable the shooter. Kill Nina. Kill Nina. Kill
Nina. He took a deep breath and threw his weight at the bronze girl.
She stepped aside as if she’d known he was coming, languidly hooking her
heel behind his ankle.
Matthias let out a loud grunt as he landed hard on the stones.
“Matthias—” Nina said, stepping forward. He scrambled backwards, nearly
landing himself in the water. If she laid hands on him again, he’d lose his
mind. Nina halted, the hurt on her face unmistakable. She had no right.
“Clumsy, this one,” the bronze girl said impassively.
“Put him under, Nina,” commanded Kaz.
“Don’t,” Matthias protested, panic surging through him.
“You’re dumb enough to capsize the boat.”
“Stay away from me, witch,” Matthias growled at Nina.
Nina gave him a tight nod. “With pleasure.”
She lifted her hands, and Matthias felt his eyelids grow heavy as she
dragged him into unconsciousness. “Kill you,” he mumbled.
“Sleep well.” Her voice was a wolf, dogging his steps. It chased him into
the dark.
In a windowless room draped in black and crimson, Matthias listened
silently to the strange words coming out of the pale, freakish boy’s mouth.
Matthias knew monsters, and one glance at Kaz Brekker had told him this
was a creature who had spent too long in the dark – he’d brought something
back with him when he’d crawled into the light. Matthias could sense it
around him. He knew others laughed at Fjerdan superstition, but he trusted
his gut. Or he had, until Nina. That had been one of the worst effects of her
betrayal, the way he’d been forced to second-guess himself. That doubt had
almost been his undoing at Hellgate, where instinct was everything.
He’d heard Brekker ’s name in prison, and the words associated with him –
criminal prodigy, ruthless, amoral. They called him Dirtyhands because
there was no sin he would not commit for the right price. And now this
demon was talking about breaking into the Ice Court, about getting
Matthias to commit treason. Again, Matthias corrected himself. I’d be
committing treason again.
He kept his eyes on Brekker. He was keenly aware of Nina watching him
from the other side of the room. He could still smell her rose perfume in his
nose and even in his mouth; the sharp flower scent rested against his
tongue, as if he were tasting her.
Matthias had woken bound and tied to a chair in what looked like some
kind of gambling parlour.
Nina must have brought him out of the stupor she’d placed him in. She was
there, along with the bronze girl. Jesper, the long-limbed boy from the boat,
sat in a corner with his bony knees drawn up, and a boy with ruddy gold
curls doodled aimlessly on a scrap of paper atop a round table made for
playing cards, occasionally gnawing on his thumb. The table was covered
with a crimson cloth flocked with a repeating pattern of crows and a wheel
similar to the one used in the Hellshow arena but with different markings
had been propped against a black lacquered wall. Matthias had the feeling
that someone – probably Nina – had tended to more of his injuries while he
was unconscious. The thought made him sick. Better clean pain than Grisha
corruption.
Then Brekker had started talking – about a drug called jurda parem, about
an impossibly high reward, and about the absurd idea of attempting a raid
on the Ice Court. Matthias wasn’t sure what might be fact or fiction, but it
hardly mattered. When Brekker finally finished, Matthias simply said,
“No.”
“Believe me when I say this, Helvar: I know getting knocked out and
waking up in strange surroundings isn’t the friendliest way to start a
partnership, but you didn’t give us many options, so try to open your mind
to the possibilities.”
“You could have come to me on your knees, and my answer would be the
same.”
“You do understand I can have you back at Hellgate in a matter of hours?
Once poor Muzzen is in the infirmary, the switch will be easy.”
“Do it. I can’t wait to tell the warden your ridiculous plans.”
“What makes you think you’ll be going back with a tongue?”
“Kaz—” Nina protested.
“Do what you want,” Matthias said. He wouldn’t betray his country again.
“I told you,” said Nina.
“Don’t pretend to know me, witch,” he snarled, his eyes trained on Brekker.
He wouldn’t look at her. He refused to.
Jesper unfolded himself from the corner. Now that they were out of the
Hellgate gloom, Matthias could see he had deep brown Zemeni skin and
incongruous grey eyes. He was built like a stork.
“Without him, there’s no job,” said Jesper. “We can’t break into the Ice
Court blind.”
Matthias wanted to laugh. “You can’t break into the Ice Court at all.” The
Ice Court wasn’t an ordinary building. It was a compound, Fjerda’s ancient
stronghold, home to an unbroken succession of kings and queens,
repository of their greatest treasures and most sacred religious relics. It was
impenetrable.
“Come now, Helvar,” said the demon. “Surely there’s something you want.
The cause is righteous enough for a zealot like you. Fjerda may think
they’ve caught a dragon by the tail, but they won’t be able to hold on. Once
Bo Yul-Bayur replicates his process, jurda parem will enter the market, and
it’s only a matter of time before others learn to manufacture it, too.”
“It will never happen. Yul-Bayur will stand trial, and if he is found guilty he
will be put to death.”
“Guilty of what?” Nina asked softly.
“Crimes against the people.”
“Which people?”
He could hear the barely leashed anger in her voice. “Natural people,”
Matthias replied. “People who live in harmony with the laws of this world
instead of twisting them for their own gain.”
Nina made a kind of exasperated snorting sound. The others just looked
amused, smirking at the poor, backward Fjerdan. Brum had warned
Matthias that the world was full of liars, pleasure seekers, faithless
heathens. And there seemed to be a concentration of them in this room.
“You’re being shortsighted about this, Helvar,” said Brekker. “Another team
could get to Yul-Bayur first. The Shu. Maybe the Ravkans. All with their
own agendas. Border disputes and old rivalries don’t matter to the Kerch.
All the Merchant Council cares about is trade, and they want to make sure
jurda parem remains a rumour and nothing more.”
“So leading criminals into the heart of Fjerda to steal a valued prisoner is a
patriotic act?” Matthias said scornfully.
“I don’t suppose the promise of four million kruge will sway you either.”
Matthias spat. “You can keep your money. Choke on it.” Then a thought
came to him – vile, barbaric, but the one thing that might allow him to
return to Hellgate with peace in his heart even if he didn’t have a tongue in
his head. He tilted back as far as his bonds would permit and focused all his
attention on Brekker. “I’ll make a deal with you.”
“I’m listening.”
“I won’t go with you, but I’ll give you a plan for the layout of the Court.
That should at least get you past the first checkpoint.”
“And what will this valuable information cost me?”
“I don’t want your money. I’ll give you the plans for nothing.” It shamed
Matthias to say the words, but he spoke them anyway. “If you let me kill
Nina Zenik.”
The little bronze girl made a sound of disgust, her contempt for him clear,
and the boy at the table stopped doodling, his mouth falling open. Kaz,
however, didn’t seem surprised. If anything, he looked pleased. Matthias
had the uncomfortable sense that the demon had known exactly how this
would play out.
“I can give you something better,” said Kaz.
What could be better than revenge? “There’s nothing else I want.”
“I can make you a drüskelle again.”
“Are you a magician, then? A wej sprite who grants wishes? I’m
superstitious, not stupid.”
“You can be both, you know, but that’s hardly the point.” Kaz slipped a
hand into his dark coat.
“Here,” he said, and gave a piece of paper to the bronze girl. Another
demon. This one walked with soft feet like she’d drifted in from the next
world and no one had the good sense to send her back. She brought the
paper up to his face for him to read. The document was written in Kerch
and Fjerdan. He couldn’t read Kerch – he’d only picked up the language in
prison – but the Fjerdan was clear enough, and as his eyes moved over the
page, Matthias’ heart started to pound.
In light of new evidence, Matthias Benedik Helvar is granted full and
immediate pardon for all charges of slave trafficking. He is released on this
day,________, with the apologies of the court, and will be provided
transport to his homeland or a destination of his choosing with all possible
haste and the sincere apologies of this court and the Kerch government.
“What new evidence?”
Kaz leaned back in his chair. “It seems Nina Zenik has recanted her
statements. She will face charges of perjury.”
Now he did look at her; he couldn’t stop it. He’d left bruises on her graceful
throat. He told himself to be glad of it.
“Perjury? How long will you serve for that, Zenik?”
“Two months,” she said quietly.
“Two months?” Now he did laugh, long and hard. His body twitched with
it, as if it were poison constricting his muscles.
The others watched him with some concern.
“Just how crazy is he?” asked Jesper, fingers drumming on the pearl
handles of his revolvers.
Brekker shrugged. “He’s not what I’d call reliable, but he’s all we’ve got.”
Two months. Probably in some cosy prison where she’d charm every guard
into bringing her fresh bread and fluffing her pillows. Or maybe she’d just
talk them into letting her pay a fine that her rich Grisha keepers back in
Ravka could cover for her.
“She can’t be trusted, you know,” he said to Brekker. “Whatever secrets you
hope to gain from Bo Yul-Bayur, she’ll turn them over to Ravka.”
“Let me worry about that, Helvar. You do your part, and the secrets of YulBayur and jurda parem will be in the hands of the people best equipped to
make sure they stay rumours.”
Two months. Nina would serve her time and return to Ravka four million
kruge richer, never giving him another thought. But if this pardon was real,
then he could go home, too.
Home. He’d imagined breaking out of Hellgate plenty of times, but he’d
never really put his mind to the idea of escape. What life was there for him
on the outside, with the charge of slaver hanging around his neck? He could
never return to Fjerda. Even if he could have borne the disgrace, he’d have
lived each day as a fugitive from the Kerch government, a marked man. He
knew he could eke out a life for himself in Novyi Zem, but what would
have been the point?
This was something different. If the demon Brekker spoke the truth,
Matthias would get to go home. The longing for it twisted in his chest – to
hear his language spoken, to see his friends again, taste semla filled with
sweet almond paste, feel the bite of the northern wind as it came roaring
over the ice. To return home and be welcomed there without the burden of
dishonour. With his name cleared, he could return to his life as a drüskelle.
And the price would be treason.
“What if Bo Yul-Bayur is dead?” he asked Brekker.
“Van Eck insists he isn’t.”
But how could the merchant Kaz spoke of truly understand Fjerdan ways?
If there hadn’t been a trial yet, there would be, and Matthias could easily
predict the outcome. His people would never free a man with such terrible
knowledge.
“But what if he is, Brekker?”
“You still get your pardon.”
Even if their quarry was already ashes on the pyre, Matthias would have his
freedom. At what cost, though? He’d made mistakes before. He’d been
foolish enough to trust Nina. He’d been weak, and he would carry that
shame for the rest of his life. But he’d paid for his stupidity in blood and
misery and the stink of Hellgate. And his crimes had been meagre things,
the actions of a naive boy. This was so much worse. To reveal the secrets of
the Ice Court, to see his homeland once more only to know that every step
he took there was an act of treason – could he do such a thing?
Brum would have laughed in their faces, torn that pardon to pieces. But Kaz
Brekker was smart. He clearly had resources. What if Matthias said no and
against all odds Brekker and his crew still found their way into the Ice
Court and stole the Shu scientist? Or what if Brekker was right and another
country got there first? It sounded like parem was too addictive to be useful
to Grisha, but what if the formula fell into Ravkan hands, and they
somehow managed to adapt it? To make Ravka’s Grisha, its Second Army,
even stronger? If he was part of this mission, Matthias could make sure Bo
Yul-Bayur never took another breath outside the Ice Court’s walls, or he
could arrange for some kind of accident on the trip back to Kerch.
Before Nina, before Hellgate, he never would have considered it. Now he
found he could make this bargain with himself. He would join the demon’s
crew, earn his pardon, and when he was a drüskelle once more, Nina Zenik
would be his first target. He’d hunt her in Kerch, in Ravka, whatever hole
or corner of the world she thought would keep her safe. He would run Nina
Zenik to ground and make her pay in every way imaginable. Death would
be too good. He’d have her thrown into the most miserable cell in the Ice
Court, where she’d never be warm again. He’d toy with her as she’d toyed
with him. He’d offer her salvation and then deny it. He’d gift her with
affection and small kindnesses then snatch them away. He would savour
every tear she shed and replace that sweet green flower scent with the salt
of her sorrow on his tongue.
Even so, the words were bitter in Matthias’ mouth when he said, “I’ll do it.”
Brekker winked at Nina, and Matthias wanted to knock his teeth in. When
I’ve dealt Nina her life’s share of misery, I’ll come for you. He’d caught
witches; how different could it be to slay a demon?
The bronze girl folded up the document and handed it to Brekker, who
slipped it into his breast pocket. Matthias felt like he was watching an old
friend, one he’d never hoped to see again, vanish into a crowd, and he was
powerless to call out.
“We’re going to untie you,” said Brekker. “I hope prison hasn’t robbed you
of all your manners or good sense.”
Matthias nodded, and the bronze girl took a knife to the ropes binding him.
“I believe you know Nina,” Brekker continued. “The lovely girl freeing you
is Inej, our thief of secrets and the best in the trade. Jesper Fahey is our
sharpshooter, Zemeni-born but try not to hold it against him, and this is
Wylan, best demolitions expert in the Barrel.”
“Raske is better,” Inej said.
The boy looked up, ruddy gold hair flopping in his eyes, and spoke for the
first time. “He’s not better. He’s reckless.”
“He knows his trade.”
“So do I.”
“Barely,” Jesper said.
“Wylan is new to the scene,” admitted Brekker.
“Of course he’s new, he looks like he’s about twelve,” retorted Matthias.
“I’m sixteen,” said Wylan sullenly.
Matthias doubted that. Fifteen at the most. The boy didn’t even look as if
he’d started shaving. In fact, at eighteen, Matthias suspected that he was the
oldest of the bunch. Brekker ’s eyes were ancient, but he couldn’t be any
older than Matthias.
For the first time, Matthias really looked at the people around him. What
kind of team is this for a mission so perilous? Treason wouldn’t be an issue
if they were all dead. And only he knew exactly how treacherous this
endeavour might prove.
“We should be using Raske,” Jesper said. “He’s good under pressure.”
“I don’t like it,” agreed Inej.
“I didn’t ask,” said Kaz. “Besides, Wylan isn’t just good with the flint and
fuss. He’s our insurance.”
“Against what?” asked Nina.
“Meet Wylan Van Eck,” said Kaz Brekker as the boy’s cheeks flooded
crimson. “Jan Van Eck’s son and our guarantee on thirty million kruge.”
Jesper stared at Wylan. “Of course you’re a Councilman’s kid.” He burst
out laughing. “That explains everything.”
He knew he should be angry at Kaz for holding back yet another vital piece
of information, but right now, he was just enjoying watching the little
revelation of Wylan Van Eck’s identity go careening around the room like
an ornery colt kicking up dust.
Wylan was red faced and mortified. Nina looked stunned and irritated. The
Fjerdan just seemed confused. Kaz appeared utterly pleased with himself.
And, of course, Inej didn’t look remotely surprised. She gathered Kaz’s
secrets and kept them as well. Jesper tried to ignore the pang of jealousy he
felt at that.
Wylan’s mouth opened and closed, his throat working. “You knew?” he
asked Kaz miserably.
Kaz leaned back in his chair, one knee bent, his bad leg stretched out before
him. “Why do you think I’ve been keeping you around?”
“I’m good at demo.”
“You’re passable at demo. You’re excellent at hostage.”
That was cruel, but that was Kaz. And the Barrel was a far rougher teacher
than Kaz could ever be.
At least this explained why Kaz had been coddling Wylan and sending jobs
his way.
“It doesn’t matter,” said Jesper. “We should still take Raske and leave this
baby merch on lockdown in Ketterdam.”
“I don’t trust Raske.”
“And you trust Wylan Van Eck?” Jesper said incredulously.
“Wylan doesn’t know enough people to cause us real trouble.”
“Don’t I have some say in this?” complained Wylan. “I’m sitting right
here.”
Kaz raised a brow. “Ever had your pocket picked, Wylan?”
“I … not that I know of.”
“Been mugged in an alley?”
“No.”
“Hung over the side of a bridge with your head in the canal?”
Wylan blinked. “No, but—”
“Ever been beaten until you can’t walk?”
“No.”
“Why do you think that is?”
“I—”
“It’s been three months since you left your daddy’s mansion on the
Geldstraat. Why do you suppose your sojourn in the Barrel has been so
blessed?”
“Lucky, I guess?” Wylan suggested weakly.
Jesper snorted. “Kaz is your luck, merchling. He’s had you under Dregs
protection – though you’re so useless, up until this minute none of us could
figure out why.”
“It was perplexing,” Nina admitted.
“Kaz always has his reasons,” murmured Inej.
“Why did you move out of your father ’s house?” Jesper asked.
“It was time,” Wylan said tightly.
“Idealist? Romantic? Revolutionary?”
“Idiot?” suggested Nina. “No one chooses to live in the Barrel if he has
another option.”
“I’m not useless,” Wylan said.
“Raske is the better demo man—” Inej began.
“I’ve been to the Ice Court. With my father. We went to an embassy dinner.
I can help with the plans.”
“See that? Hidden depths.” Kaz tapped his gloved fingers over the crow’s
head of his cane. “And I don’t want our only leverage against Van Eck
cooling his heels in Ketterdam while we head north.
Wylan goes with us. He’s good enough at demo, and he’s got a fine hand for
sketching, thanks to all those pricey tutors.”
Wylan blushed deeper, and Jesper shook his head. “Play piano, too?”
“Flute,” said Wylan defensively.
“Perfect.”
“And since Wylan has seen the Ice Court with his very own eyes,” Kaz
continued, “he can help keep you honest, Helvar.”
The Fjerdan scowled furiously, and Wylan looked a little ill.
“Don’t worry,” Nina said. “The glower isn’t lethal.”
Jesper noted the way Matthias’ shoulders bunched every time Nina talked.
He didn’t know what history they were chewing on, but they’d probably kill
each other before they ever got to Fjerda.
Jesper rubbed his eyes. He was low on sleep and exhausted after the
excitement of the prison break, and now his thoughts were buzzing and
jumping at the possibility of thirty million kruge. Even after Per Haskell got
his twenty percent, that would leave four million for each of them. What
could he do with a pile of scratch that big? Jesper could just imagine his
father saying, Land yourself in a pile of shit twice as big. Saints, he missed
him.
Kaz tapped his cane on the polished wood floor.
“Take out your pen and proper paper, Wylan. Let’s put Helvar to work.”
Wylan reached into the satchel at his feet and pulled out a slender roll of
butcher ’s paper followed by a metal case that held an expensive-looking
pen and ink set.
“How nice,” Jesper noted. “A nib for every occasion.”
“Start talking,” Kaz said to the Fjerdan. “It’s time to pay the rent.”
Matthias directed his furious gaze at Kaz. Definitely a mighty glower. It
was almost fun to watch him pit it against Kaz’s shark-like stare.
Finally, the Fjerdan shut his eyes, took a deep breath and said, “The Ice
Court is on a bluff overlooking the harbour at Djerholm. It’s built in
concentric circles, like the rings of a tree.” The words came slowly, as if
speaking each one was causing him pain. “First, the ringwall, then the outer
circle. It’s divided into three sectors. Beyond that is the ice moat, then at the
centre of everything, the White Island.”
Wylan began to sketch. Jesper peered over Wylan’s shoulder. “That doesn’t
look like a tree, it looks like a cake.”
“Well, it is sort of like a cake,” Wylan said defensively. “The whole thing is
built on a rise.”
Kaz gestured for Matthias to continue.
“The cliffs are unscalable, and the northern road is the only way in or out.
You’ll have to get through a guarded checkpoint before you even reach the
ringwall.”
“Two checkpoints,” said Wylan. “When I was there, there were two.”
“There you have it,” Kaz said to Jesper. “Marketable skills. Wylan is
watching you, Helvar.”
“Why two checkpoints?” Inej asked.
Matthias stared at the black walnut slats of the floor and said, “It’s harder to
bribe two sets of guards. The security at the Court is always built with
multiple fail-safes. If you make it that far—”
“We, Helvar. If we make it that far,” corrected Kaz.
The Fjerdan gave the barest shrug. “If we make it that far, the outer circle is
split into three sectors: the prison, the drüskelle facilities, and the embassy,
each with its own gate in the ringwall. The prison gate is always
functioning, but it’s kept under constant armed surveillance. Of the two
others, only one is ever operational at any given time.”
“What determines which gate is used?” asked Jesper.
“The schedule changes each week, and guards are only given their postings
the night before.”
“Maybe that’s a good thing,” said Jesper. “If we can figure out which gate
isn’t running, it won’t be manned or guarded—”
“There are always at least four guards on duty even when the gate isn’t in
use.”
“Pretty sure we can handle four guards.”
Matthias shook his head. “The gates weigh thousands of pounds and can
only be operated from within the guardhouses. And even if you could raise
one of them, opening a gate that isn’t scheduled for use would trigger Black
Protocol. The entire Court would go on lockdown, and you’d give away
your location.”
A ripple of unease passed through the room. Jesper shifted uncomfortably.
If the expressions on the others’ faces were any indication, they were all
having the same thought: Just what are we getting into? Only Kaz seemed
unfazed.
“Put it all down,” Kaz said, tapping the paper. “Helvar, I expect you to
describe the mechanics of the alarm system to Wylan later.”
Matthias frowned. “I don’t really know how it works. It’s some kind of
series of cables and bells.”
“Tell him all you know. Where will they be keeping Bo Yul-Bayur?”
Slowly, Matthias rose and approached the plans taking shape beneath
Wylan’s pen. His movements were reluctant, as wary as if Kaz had told him
to pet a rattler.
“Probably here,” the Fjerdan said, resting his finger on the paper. “The
prison sector. The high-security cells are on the topmost floor. It’s where
they keep the most dangerous criminals. Assassins, terrorists—”
“Grisha?” Nina asked.
“Exactly,” he replied grimly.
“You guys are going to make this really fun, aren’t you?” asked Jesper.
“Usually people don’t start hating each other until a week into the job, but
you two have a head start.”
They cast him twin glares, and Jesper beamed back at them, but Kaz’s
attention was focused on the plans.
“Bo Yul-Bayur isn’t dangerous,” he said thoughtfully. “At least not in that
way. I don’t think they’ll keep him locked up with the rabble.”
“I think they’ll keep him in a grave,” said Matthias.
“Operate on the assumption that he isn’t dead. He’s a valued prisoner, one
they don’t want falling into the wrong hands before he stands trial. Where
would he be?”
Matthias looked at the plan. “The buildings of the outer circle surround the
ice moat, and at the moat’s centre is the White Island, where the treasury
and the Royal Palace are. It’s the most secure place in the Ice Court.”
“Then that’s where Bo Yul-Bayur will be,” said Kaz.
Matthias smiled. Actually, it was less a smile than a baring of teeth. He
learned that grin at Hellgate, thought Jesper.
“Then your quest is pointless,” Matthias said. “There is no way a group of
foreigners is going to make it to the White Island.”
“Don’t look so pleased, Helvar. We don’t get inside, you don’t get your
pardon.”
Matthias shrugged. “I can’t change what is true. The ice moat is watched
from multiple guard towers on the White Island and a lookout atop the
Elderclock. It’s completely uncrossable except by way of the glass bridge,
and there’s no way onto the glass bridge without clearance.”
“Hringkälla is coming,” Nina said.
“Be silent,” Matthias snapped at her.
“Pray, don’t,” said Kaz.
“Hringkälla. It’s the Day of Listening, when the new drüskelle are initiated
on the White Island.”
Matthias’ knuckles flexed white. “You have no right to speak of those
things. They’re holy.”
“They’re facts. The Fjerdan royals throw a huge party with guests from all
over the world, and plenty of the entertainment comes straight from
Ketterdam.”
“Entertainment?” Kaz asked.
“Actors, dancers, a Komedie Brute troupe, and the best talent from the
pleasure houses of West Stave.”
“I thought Fjerdans didn’t go in for that sort of thing,” said Jesper.
Inej’s lips quirked. “You’ve never seen Fjerdan soldiers on the Staves?”
“I meant when they’re at home,” Jesper said.
“It’s the one day a year they all stop acting so miserable and actually let
themselves have a good time,” Nina replied. “Besides, only the drüskelle
live like monks.”
“A good time needn’t involve wine and … and flesh,” Matthias sputtered.
Nina batted her glossy lashes at him. “You wouldn’t know a good time if it
sidled up to you and stuck a lollipop in your mouth.” She looked back at the
plans. “The embassy gate will have to be open.
Maybe we shouldn’t worry about breaking into the Ice Court. Maybe we
should just walk in with the performers.”
“This isn’t the Hellshow,” said Kaz. “It won’t be that easy.”
“Visitors are vetted weeks before they arrive at the Ice Court,” Matthias
said. “Anyone entering the embassy will have their papers checked and
checked again. Fjerdans aren’t fools.”
Nina raised a brow. “Not all of them, at least.”
“Don’t poke the bear, Nina,” Kaz said. “We need him friendly. When does
this party take place?”
“It’s seasonal,” Nina said, “on the spring equinox.”
“Two weeks from today,” Inej noted.
Kaz cocked his head to one side, his eyes focused on something in the
distance.
“Scheming face,” Jesper whispered to Inej.
She nodded. “Definitely.”
“Is the White Rose sending a delegation?” Kaz asked.
Nina shook her head. “I didn’t hear anything about it.”
“Even if we go straight to Djerholm,” Inej said, “we’ll need most of a week
to travel. There isn’t time to secure documents or create cover that will bear
up under scrutiny.”
“We’re not going in through the embassy,” said Kaz. “Always hit where the
mark isn’t looking.”
“Who’s Mark?” asked Wylan.
Jesper burst out laughing. “Oh, Saints, you are something. The mark, the
pigeon, the cosy, the fool you’re looking to fleece.”
Wylan drew himself up. “I may not have had your … education, but I’m
sure I know plenty of words that you don’t.”
“Also the proper way to fold a napkin and dance a minuet. Oh, and you can
play the flute.
Marketable skills, merchling. Marketable skills.”
“No one dances the minuet any more,” grumbled Wylan.
Kaz leaned back. “What’s the easiest way to steal a man’s wallet?”
“Knife to the throat?” asked Inej.
“Gun to the back?” said Jesper.
“Poison in his cup?” suggested Nina.
“You’re all horrible,” said Matthias.
Kaz rolled his eyes. “The easiest way to steal a man’s wallet is to tell him
you’re going to steal his watch. You take his attention and direct it where
you want it to go. Hringkälla is going to do that job for us. The Ice Court
will have to divert resources to monitoring guests and protecting the royal
family. They can’t be looking everywhere at once. It’s the perfect
opportunity to spring Bo Yul-Bayur.” Kaz pointed to the prison gate in the
ringwall. “Remember what I told you at Hellgate, Nina?”
“It’s hard to keep track of all your wisdom.”
“At the prison, they won’t care about who’s coming in, just anyone trying to
get out.” His gloved finger slid sideways to the next sector. “At the embassy
they won’t care who’s going out, they’ll just be focused on who’s trying to
get in. We enter through the prison, leave through the embassy. Helvar, is
the Elderclock functional?”
Matthias nodded. “It chimes every quarter hour. It’s also how the alarm
protocols are sounded.”
“It’s accurate?”
“Of course.”
“Quality Fjerdan engineering,” Nina said sourly.
Kaz ignored her. “Then we’ll use the Elderclock to coordinate our
movements.”
“Will we enter disguised as guards?” Wylan asked.
Jesper couldn’t keep the disdain from his voice. “Only Nina and Matthias
speak Fjerdan.”
“I speak Fjerdan,” Wylan protested.
“Schoolroom Fjerdan, right? I bet you speak Fjerdan about as well as I
speak moose.”
“Moose is probably your native tongue,” mumbled Wylan.
“We enter as we are,” Kaz said. “As criminals. The prison is our front
door.”
“Let me get this straight,” said Jesper. “You want us to let the Fjerdans lock
us in jail. Isn’t that what we’re always trying to avoid?”
“Criminal identities are slippery. It’s one of the perks of being a member of
the troublemaking class. They’ll be counting heads at the prison gate,
looking at names and crimes, not checking passports or examining embassy
seals.”
“Because no one wants to go to prison,” Jesper said.
Nina rubbed her hands over her arms. “I don’t want to be locked up in a
Fjerdan cell.”
Kaz flicked his sleeve, and two slender rods of metal appeared between his
fingers. They danced over his knuckles then vanished once more.
“Lockpicks?” Nina asked.
“You let me take care of the cells,” Kaz said.
“Hit where the mark isn’t looking,” mused Inej.
“That’s right,” said Kaz. “And the Ice Court is like any other mark, one big
white pigeon ready for the plucking.”
“Will Yul-Bayur come willingly?” Inej asked.
“Van Eck said the Council gave Yul-Bayur a code word when they first
tried to get him out of Shu Han so he’d know who to trust: Sesh-uyeh. It
will tell him we’ve been sent by Kerch.”
“Sesh-uyeh,” Wylan repeated, trying the syllables clumsily on his tongue.
“What does it mean?”
Nina examined a spot on the floor and said, “Heartsick.”
“This can be done,” said Kaz, “and we’re the ones to do it.” Jesper felt the
mood shift in the room as possibility took hold. It was a subtle thing, but
he’d learned to look for it at the tables – the moment a player came awake
to the fact that he might have a winning hand. Anticipation tugged at Jesper,
a fizzing mix of fear and excitement that made it hard for him to sit still.
Maybe Matthias sensed it, too, because he folded his huge arms and said,
“You have no idea what you’re up against.”
“But you do, Helvar. I want you working on the plan of the Ice Court every
minute until we sail. No detail is too small or inconsequential. I’ll be
checking on you regularly.”
Inej traced her finger over the rough sketch Wylan had produced, a series of
embedded circles. “It really does look like the rings of a tree,” she said.
“No,” said Kaz. “It looks like a target.”
“We’re done here,” Kaz told the others. “I’ll send word to each of you after
I find us a ship, but be ready to sail by tomorrow night.”
“So soon?” Inej asked.
“We don’t know what kind of weather we’ll hit, and there’s a long journey
ahead of us. Hringkälla is our best shot at Bo Yul-Bayur. I’m not going to
risk losing it.”
Kaz needed time to think through the plan that was forming in his mind. He
could see the basics –
where they would enter, how they would leave. But the plan he envisioned
would mean that they wouldn’t be able to bring much with them. They’d be
operating without their usual resources. That meant more variables and a lot
more chances for things to go wrong.
Keeping Wylan Van Eck around meant he could at least make sure they got
their reward. But it wasn’t going to be easy. They hadn’t even left
Ketterdam, and Wylan already seemed completely out of his depth. He
wasn’t much younger than Kaz, but somehow he looked like a child –
smooth-skinned, wide-eyed, like a silk-eared puppy in a room full of
fighting dogs.
“Keep Wylan out of trouble,” he told Jesper as he dismissed them.
“Why me?”
“You’re unlucky enough to be in my line of sight, and I don’t want any
sudden reconciliations between father and son before we set sail.”
“You don’t need to worry about that,” said Wylan.
“I worry about everything, merchling. That’s why I’m still alive. And you
can keep an eye on Jesper, too.”
“On me?” Jesper said indignantly.
Kaz slid a blackwood panel aside and unlocked the safe hidden behind it.
“Yes, you.” He counted out four slender stacks of kruge and handed one
over to Jesper. “This is for bullets, not bets. Wylan, make sure his feet don’t
mysteriously find their way into a gambling den on his way to buy
ammunition, understood?”
“I don’t need a nursemaid,” Jesper snapped.
“More like a chaperone, but if you want him to wash your nappies and tuck
you in at night, that’s your business.” He ignored Jesper ’s stung expression
and doled kruge out to Wylan for explosives and to Nina for whatever she’d
need in her tailoring kit. “Stock up for the journey only,” he said. “If this
works the way I think it will, we’re going to have to enter the Ice Court
empty-handed.”
He saw a shadow pass over Inej’s face. She wouldn’t like being without her
knives any more than he liked being without his cane.
“I’ll need you to get cold weather gear,” he told her. “There’s a shop on the
Wijnstraat that supplies trappers – start there.”
“You think to approach from the north?” asked Helvar.
Kaz nodded. “The Djerholm harbour is crawling with customs agents, and
I’m going to bet they’ll be tightening security during your big party.”
“It isn’t a party.”
“It sounds like a party,” said Jesper.
“It isn’t supposed to be a party,” Helvar amended sullenly.
“What are we going to do with him?” Nina asked, nodding at Matthias. Her
voice was disinterested, but the performance was wasted on everyone
except Helvar. They’d all seen her tears at Hellgate.
“For the moment, he stays here at the Crow Club. I want you dredging your
memory for details,
Helvar. Wylan and Jesper will join you later. We’ll keep this parlour closed.
If anyone playing in the main hall asks, tell them there’s a private game
going on.”
“We have to sleep here?” asked Jesper. “I have things I need to see to at the
Slat.”
“You’ll manage,” Kaz said, though he knew asking Jesper to spend the
night in a gambling den without placing a bet was a particular kind of
cruelty. He turned to the rest of them. “Not a word to anyone. No one is to
know you’re leaving Kerch. You’re working with me on a job at a country
house outside the city. That’s all.”
“Are you going to tell us anything else about your miraculous plan?” Nina
asked.
“On the boat. The less you know, the less you can talk.”
“And you’re leaving Helvar unshackled?”
“Can you behave?” Kaz asked the Fjerdan.
His eyes looked murder, but he nodded.
“We’ll be locking this room up tight and posting a guard.”
Inej considered the giant Fjerdan. “Maybe two.”
“Post Dirix and Rotty, but don’t give them too many details. They’ll sail out
with us, and I can fill them in later. And Wylan, you and I are going to have
a chat. I want to know everything about your father ’s trading company.”
Wylan shrugged. “I don’t know anything about it. He doesn’t include me in
those discussions.”
“You’re telling me you’ve never snooped around his office? Looked
through his documents?”
“No,” Wylan said, his chin jutting out slightly. Kaz was surprised to find he
actually believed him.
“What did I tell you?” Jesper said cheerfully as he headed through the door.
“Useless.”
The others started to file out behind him, and Kaz shut the safe, giving the
tumbler a spin.
“I’d like a word with you, Brekker,” Helvar said. “Alone.”
Inej cast Kaz a warning glance. Kaz ignored it. She didn’t think he could
handle a lump of country muscle like Matthias Helvar? He slid the wall
panel closed and gave his leg a shake. It was aching now
– too many late nights and too much time with his weight on it.
“Go on, Wraith,” he said. “Shut the door behind you.”
As soon as the door clicked shut, Matthias lunged for him. Kaz let it
happen. He’d been expecting it.
Matthias clamped one filthy hand over Kaz’s mouth. The sensation of skin
on skin set off a riot of revulsion in Kaz’s head, but because he’d been
anticipating the attack, he managed to control the sickness that overcame
him. Matthias’ other hand rooted around in Kaz’s coat pockets, first one
then the other.
“Fer esje? ” he grunted angrily in Fjerdan. Then, “Where is it?” in Kerch.
Kaz gave Helvar another moment of frenzied searching, then dropped his
elbow and jabbed upwards, forcing Helvar to loosen his grip. Kaz slipped
away easily. He smacked Helvar behind the right leg with his cane. The big
Fjerdan collapsed. When he tried to shove up again, Kaz kicked him.
“Stay down, you pathetic skiv.”
Again, Helvar tried to rise. He was fast, and prison had made him strong.
Kaz cracked him hard on the jaw, then gave the pressure points at Helvar ’s
huge shoulders two lightning-quick jabs with the tip of his cane. The
Fjerdan grunted as his arms went limp and useless at his sides.
Kaz flipped the cane in his hand and pressed the carved crow’s head against
Helvar ’s throat. “Move again and I’ll smash your jaw so badly you’ll be
drinking your meals for the rest of your life.”
The Fjerdan stilled, his blue eyes alight with hate.
“Where is the pardon?” Helvar growled. “I saw you put it in your pocket.”
Kaz crouched down beside him and produced the folded document from a
pocket that had seemed
empty just a moment before. “This?”
The Fjerdan flopped his useless arms, then released a low animal growl as
Kaz made the pardon
vanish in thin air. It reappeared between his fingers. He turned it once,
flashing the text, then ran his hand over it, and showed Helvar the
seemingly blank page.
“Demjin,” muttered Helvar. Kaz didn’t speak Fjerdan, but that word he
knew. Demon.
Hardly. He’d learned sleight of hand from the cardsharps and monte runners
on East Stave, and spent hours practising it in front of a muddy mirror he’d
bought with his first week’s pay.
Kaz knocked his cane gently against Helvar ’s jaw. “For every trick you’ve
seen, I know a thousand more. You think a year in Hellgate hardened you
up? Taught you to fight? Hellgate would have been paradise to me as a
child. You move like an ox – you’d last about two days on the streets where
I grew up. This was your one free pass, Helvar. Don’t test me again. Nod so
I know you understand.”
Helvar pressed his lips together and nodded once.
“Good. I think we’ll shackle those feet tonight.”
Kaz rose, snatched his new hat from the desk where he’d left it, and gave
the Fjerdan one last kick to the kidneys for good measure. Sometimes the
big ones didn’t know when to stay down.
Over the next day, Inej saw Kaz begin to move the pieces of his scheme
into position. She’d been privy to his consultations with every member of
the crew, but she knew she was seeing only fragments of his plan. That was
the game Kaz always played.
If he had doubts about what they were attempting, they didn’t show, and
Inej wished she shared his certainty. The Ice Court had been built to
withstand an onslaught of armies, assassins, Grisha, and spies. When she’d
said as much to Kaz, he’d simply replied, “But it hasn’t been built to keep
us out.”
His confidence unnerved her. “What makes you think we can do this? There
will be other teams out there, trained soldiers and spies, people with years
of experience.”
“This isn’t a job for trained soldiers and spies. It’s a job for thugs and
thieves. Van Eck knows it, and that’s why he brought us in.”
“You can’t spend his money if you’re dead.”
“I’ll acquire expensive habits in the afterlife.”
“There’s a difference between confidence and arrogance.”
He’d turned his back on her then, giving each of his gloves a sharp tug.
“And when I want a sermon on that, I know who to come to. If you want
out, just say so.”
Her spine had straightened, her own pride rising to her defence. “Matthias
isn’t the only irreplaceable member of this crew, Kaz. You need me.”
“I need your skills, Inej. That’s not the same thing. You may be the best
spider crawling around the Barrel, but you’re not the only one. You’d do
well to remember it if you want to keep your share of the haul.”
She hadn’t said a word, hadn’t wanted to show just how angry he’d made
her, but she’d left his office and hadn’t said a thing to him since.
Now, as she headed towards the harbour, she wondered what kept her on
this path.
She could leave Kerch any time she wanted. She could stow away on a ship
bound for Novyi Zem.
She could go back to Ravka and search for her family. Hopefully they’d
been safe in the west when the civil war broke out, or maybe they’d taken
refuge in Shu Han. The Suli caravans had been following the same wellworn roads for years, and she had the skills to steal what she needed to
survive until she found them.
That would mean walking out on her debt to the Dregs. Per Haskell would
blame Kaz; he’d be forced to carry the price of her indenture, and she’d be
leaving him vulnerable without his Wraith to gather secrets. But hadn’t he
told her that she was easily replaced? If they managed to pull off this heist
and return to Kerch with Bo Yul-Bayur safely in tow, her percentage of the
haul would be more than enough to buy her way out of her contract with the
Dregs. She’d owe Kaz nothing, and there would be no reason for her to
stay.
Sunrise was only an hour away, but the streets were crowded as she wended
her way from East to West Stave. There was a Suli saying: The heart is an
arrow. It demands aim to land true. Her father had liked to recite this when
she was training on the wire or the swings. Be decisive, he’d say. You have
to know where you want to go before you get there. Her mother had laughed
at this. That’s not what that means, she’d say. You take the romance out of
everything. He hadn’t, though. Her father had adored her mother. Inej
remembered him leaving little bouquets of wild geraniums for her mother to
find everywhere, in the cupboards, the camp cookpots, the sleeves of her
costumes.
Shall I tell you the secret of true love? her father once asked her. A friend of
mine liked to tell me that women love flowers. He had many flirtations, but
he never found a wife. Do you know why?
Because women may love flowers, but only one woman loves the scent of
gardenias in late summer that remind her of her grandmother’s porch. Only
one woman loves apple blossoms in a blue cup. Only one woman loves wild
geraniums.
That’s Mama! Inej had cried.
Yes, Mama loves wild geraniums because no other flower has quite the
same colour, and she claims that when she snaps the stem and puts a sprig
behind her ear, the whole world smells like summer.
Many boys will bring you flowers. But some day you’ll meet a boy who will
learn your favourite flower, your favourite song, your favourite sweet. And
even if he is too poor to give you any of them, it won’t matter because he
will have taken the time to know you as no one else does. Only that boy
earns your heart.
That felt like a hundred years ago. Her father had been wrong. There had
been no boys to bring her flowers, only men with stacks of kruge and purses
full of coin. Would she ever see her father again? Hear her mother singing,
listen to her uncle’s silly stories? I’m not sure I have a heart to give any
more, Papa.
The problem was that Inej was no longer certain what she was aiming for.
When she’d been little, it had been easy – a smile from her father, the
tightrope raised another foot, orange cakes wrapped in white paper. Then it
had been getting free of Tante Heleen and the Menagerie, and after that,
surviving each day, getting a little stronger with every morning. Now she
didn’t know what she wanted.
Just this minute, I’ll settle for an apology, she decided. And I won’t board
the boat without one.
Even if Kaz isn’t sorry, he can pretend. He at least owes me his best
imitation of a human being.
If she hadn’t been running late, she would have looped around West Stave
or simply travelled over the rooftops – that was the Ketterdam she loved,
empty and quiet, high above the crowds, a moonlit mountain range of
gabled peaks and off-kilter chimneys. But tonight she was short on time.
Kaz had sent her scouring the shops for two lumps of paraffin at the last
minute. He wouldn’t even tell her what they were for or why they were so
necessary. And snow goggles? She’d had to visit three different outfitters to
acquire them. She was so tired she didn’t entirely trust herself to make the
climb over the gables, not after two nights without sleep and a day spent
wrangling supplies for their trek to the Ice Court.
She supposed she was daring herself, too.
She never walked West Stave alone. With the Dregs at her side, she could
stroll by the Menagerie without a glance towards the golden bars on the
windows. But tonight, her heart was pounding, and she could hear the roar
of blood in her ears as the gilded façade came into view. The Menagerie had
been built to look like a tiered cage, its first two storeys left open but for the
widely spaced golden bars. It was also known as the House of Exotics. If
you had a taste for a Shu girl or a Fjerdan giant, a redhead from the
Wandering Isle, a dark-skinned Zemeni, the Menagerie was your
destination. Each girl was known by her animal name – leopard, mare, fox,
raven, ermine, fawn, snake. Suli seers wore the jackal mask when they plied
their trade and looked into a person’s fate. But what man would want to bed
a jackal? So the Suli girl – and the Menagerie always stocked a Suli girl –
was known as the lynx. Clients didn’t come looking for the girls
themselves, just brown Suli skin, the fire of Kaelish hair, the tilt of golden
Shu eyes. The animals remained the same, though the girls came and went.
Inej glimpsed peacock feathers in the parlour, and her heart stuttered. It was
just a bit of decoration, part of a lavish flower arrangement, but the panic
inside her didn’t care. It rose up, clutching at her breath. People crowded in
on all sides, men in masks, women in veils – or maybe they were men in
veils and women in masks. It was impossible to tell. The horns of the Imp.
The goggling eyes of the Madman, the sad face of the Scarab Queen
wrought in black and gold. Artists loved to paint scenes of West Stave, the
boys and girls who worked the brothels, the pleasure seekers dressed as
characters of the Komedie Brute. But there was no beauty here, no real
merriment or joy, just transactions, people seeking escape or some colourful
oblivion, some dream of decadence that they could wake from whenever
they wished.
Inej forced herself to look at the Menagerie as she passed.
It’s just a place, she told herself. Just another house. How would Kaz see
it? Where are the entrances and exits? How do the locks work? Which
windows are unbarred? How many guards are
posted, and which ones look alert? Just a house full of locks to pick, safes to
crack, pigeons to dupe.
And she was the predator now, not Heleen in her peacock feathers, not any
man who walked these streets.
As soon as she was out of sight of the Menagerie, the tight feeling in her
chest and throat began to ease. She’d done it. She’d walked alone on West
Stave, right in front of the House of Exotics.
Whatever was waiting for her in Fjerda, she could face it.
A hand hooked around her forearm and yanked her off her feet.
Inej regained her balance quickly. She spun on her heel and tried to pull
away, but the grip was too strong.
“Hello, little lynx.”
Inej hissed in a breath and tore her arm free. Tante Heleen. That was what
her girls knew to call Heleen Van Houden or risk the back of her hand. To
the rest of the Barrel she was the Peacock, though Inej had always thought
she looked less like a bird than a preening cat. Her hair was a thick and
luscious gold, her eyes hazel and slightly feline. Her tall, sinuous frame was
draped in vibrant blue silk, the plunging neckline accented with iridescent
feathers that tickled the signature diamond choker glittering at her neck.
Inej turned to run, but her path was blocked by a huge bruiser, his blue
velvet coat stretched tight across his big shoulders. Cobbet, Heleen’s
favourite enforcer.
“Oh, no you don’t, little lynx.”
Inej’s vision blurred. Trapped. Trapped. Trapped again.
“That’s not my name,” Inej managed to gasp out.
“Stubborn thing.”
Heleen grabbed hold of Inej’s tunic.
Move, her mind screamed, but she couldn’t. Her muscles had locked up; a
high whine of terror filled her head.
Heleen ran a single manicured talon along her cheek. “Lynx is your only
name,” Heleen crooned.
“You’re still pretty enough to fetch a good price. Getting hard around the
eyes though – too much time spent with that little thug Brekker.”
A humiliating sound emerged from Inej’s throat, a choked wheeze.
“I know what you are, lynx. I know what you’re worth down to the cent.
Cobbet, maybe we should take her home now.”
Black crowded into Inej’s vision. “You wouldn’t dare. The Dregs—”
“I can bide my time, little lynx. You’ll wear my silks again, I promise.” She
released Inej. “Enjoy your night,” she said with a smile, then snapped open
her blue fan and whirled away into the crowd, Cobbet trailing after her.
Inej stood frozen, shaking. Then she dove into the crowd, eager to
disappear. She wanted to break into a run, but she just kept moving steadily,
pushing towards the harbour. As she walked, she released the triggers on
the sheaths at her forearms, feeling the grips of her daggers slide into her
palms.
Sankt Petyr, renowned for his bravery, on the right; the slender, bonehandled blade she’d named for Sankta Alina on the left. She recited the
names of her other knives, too. Sankta Marya and Sankta Anastasia
strapped to her thighs. Sankt Vladimir hidden in her boot, and Sankta
Lizabeta snug at her belt, the blade etched in a pattern of roses. Protect me,
protect me. She had to believe her Saints saw and understood the things she
did to survive.
What was wrong with her? She was the Wraith. She had nothing to fear
from Tante Heleen any longer. Per Haskell had bought out her indenture.
He’d freed her. She wasn’t a slave; she was a valued member of the Dregs,
a thief of secrets, the best in the Barrel.
She hurried past the light and music of the Lid, and finally the Ketterdam
harbours came into view, the sights and sounds of the Barrel fading as she
neared the water. There were no crowds to bump against her here, no
cloying perfumes or wild masks. She took a long, deep breath. From this
vantage point she could just see the top of one of the Tidemaker towers,
where lights always burned. The thick obelisks of black stone were manned
day and night by a select group of Grisha who kept the tides permanently
high over the landbridge that otherwise would have connected Kerch to Shu
Han. Even Kaz had never been able to learn the identities of the Council of
Tides, where they lived, or how their loyalty to Kerch had been guaranteed.
They watched the harbours, too, and if a signal went up from the
harbourmaster or a dockworker, they’d alter the tides and keep anyone from
heading out to sea.
But on this night, there would be no signal. The right bribes had been paid
to the right officials, and their ship should be ready to sail.
Inej broke into a jog, heading for the loading docks at Fifth Harbour. She
was very late – she wasn’t looking forward to Kaz’s disapproving frown
when she made it to the pier.
She was glad for the peace of the docks, but they seemed almost too still
after the noise and chaos of the Barrel. Here, the rows of crates and cargo
containers were stacked high on either side of her –
three, sometimes four, on top of one another. They made this part of the
docks feel like a labyrinth. A cold sweat broke out at the base of her spine.
The run-in with Tante Heleen had left her shaken, and the heft of the
daggers in her hands wasn’t enough to soothe her rattled nerves. She knew
she should get used to carrying a pistol, but the weight threw off her
balance, and guns could jam or lock in a bad moment. Little lynx. Her
blades were reliable. And they made her feel like she’d been born with
proper claws.
A light mist was rising off the water, and through it, Inej saw Kaz and the
others waiting near the pier. They all wore the nondescript clothes of sailors
– roughspun trousers, boots, thick wool coats and hats. Even Kaz had
foregone his immaculately cut suit in favour of a bulky wool coat. The thick
sheaf of his dark hair was combed back, the sides trimmed short as always.
He looked like a dockworker, or a boy setting sail on his first adventure. It
was almost as if she were peering through a lens at some other, more
pleasant reality.
Behind them, she saw the little schooner Kaz had commandeered, Ferolind
written in bold script on its side. It would fly the purple Kerch fishes and
the colourful flag of the Haanraadt Bay Company. To anyone in Fjerda or
on the True Sea, they would simply look like Kerch trappers heading north
for skins and furs. Inej quickened her pace. If she hadn’t been running late,
they probably would have been aboard or even on their way out of the
harbour already.
They would keep a minimal crew, all former sailors who had made their
way into the ranks of the Dregs through one misfortune or another. Through
the mists, she made a quick count of the waiting group. The number was
off. They’d brought on four additional members of the Dregs to help sail the
schooner since none of them really knew their way around the rigging, but
she didn’t see any of them.
Maybe they’re already on board? But even as she had the thought, her boot
landed on something soft, and she stumbled.
She looked down. In the dim glow of the harbour gaslights, she saw Dirix,
one of the Dregs who’d been meant to make the journey with them. There
was a knife in his abdomen, and his eyes were glassy.
“Kaz!” she shouted.
But it was too late. The schooner exploded, knocking Inej off her feet and
showering the docks in flame.
Jesper always felt better when people were shooting at him. It wasn’t that
he liked the idea of dying (in fact, that potential outcome was a definite
drawback), but if he was worrying about staying alive, he couldn’t be
thinking about anything else. That sound – the swift, shocking report of
gunfire –
called the scattered, irascible, permanently seeking part of his mind into
focus like nothing else. It was better than being at the tables and waiting for
the flop, better than standing at Makker ’s Wheel and seeing his number
come up. He’d discovered it in his first fight on the Zemeni frontier. His
father had been sweating, trembling, barely able to load his revolver. But
Jesper had found his calling.
Now he braced his arms on the top of the crate where he’d taken cover and
let loose with both barrels. His weapons were Zemeni-made revolvers that
could fire six shots in rapid succession, unmatched by anything in
Ketterdam. He felt them getting hot in his hands.
Kaz had warned them to anticipate competition, other teams bent on
gaining the prize at any cost, but this was early in the job for things to be
going so badly. They were surrounded, at least one man down, a burning
ship at their backs. They’d lost their transportation to Fjerda, and if the
shots raining down on them were any indication, they were seriously
outnumbered. He supposed it could have been worse; they could have been
on the boat when it exploded.
Jesper crouched down to reload and couldn’t quite believe the sight that met
his eyes. Wylan Van Eck was actually curled up on the dock, his soft
mercher ’s hands thrown over his head. Jesper heaved a sigh, lay down a
few shots for cover and lunged out from behind the sweet security of his
crate. He seized Wylan by the collar of his shirt and yanked him back to
shelter.
Jesper gave him a little shake. “Pull it together, kid.”
“Not a kid,” Wylan mumbled, batting Jesper ’s hands away.
“Fine, you’re an elder statesman. Do you know how to shoot?”
Wylan nodded slowly. “Skeet.”
Jesper rolled his eyes. He snagged the rifle from his back and shoved it into
Wylan’s chest. “Great.
This is just like shooting clay pigeons, but they make a different sound
when you hit one.”
Jesper whirled, revolvers raised, as a shape sprang into his peripheral
vision, but it was just Kaz.
“Head east to the next dock, board at berth twenty-two,” Kaz said.
“What’s at berth twenty-two?”
“The real Ferolind.”
“But—”
“The boat that blew was a decoy.”
“You knew?”
“No, I took precautions. It’s what I do, Jesper.”
“You could have told us we—”
“That would defeat the purpose of a decoy. Get moving.” Kaz glanced at
Wylan, who stood there
cradling the rifle like an infant. “And make sure he gets to the ship in one
piece.”
Jesper watched Kaz vanish back into the shadows, cane in one hand, pistol
in the other. Even on one good leg, he was eerily spry.
Then Jesper gave Wylan another jostle. “Let’s go.”
“Go?”
“Didn’t you hear what Kaz said? We need to make it to berth twenty-two.”
Wylan nodded dumbly. His eyes were dazed and wide enough to drink
from.
“Just stay behind me and try not to get killed. Ready?”
Wylan shook his head.
“Then forget I asked.” He placed Wylan’s hand on the rifle’s grip. “Come
on.”
Jesper laid down another series of shots, sketching a wild formation he
hoped would disguise their location. One revolver empty, he lunged away
from the crate and into the shadows. He half expected Wylan wouldn’t
follow, but he could hear the merchling behind him, breathing hard, a low
whistle in his lungs as they pounded towards the next stack of barrels.
Jesper hissed as a bullet whizzed by his cheek, close enough to leave a
burn.
They threw themselves behind the barrels. From this vantage point, he saw
Nina wedged into a space between two stacks of crates. She had her arms
raised, and as one of their attackers moved into view, she clenched her fist.
The boy crumpled to the ground, clutching his chest. She was at a
disadvantage in this maze, though. Heartrenders needed to see their targets
to bring them down.
Helvar was beside her with his back to the crate, his hands bound. A
reasonable precaution, but the Fjerdan was valuable, and Jesper had a
moment to wonder why Kaz had left him in such straits before he saw Nina
produce a knife from her sleeve and slash through Helvar ’s bonds. She
slapped a pistol into his hands. “Defend yourself,” she said with a growl,
and then returned her focus to the fight.
Not smart, Jesper thought. Do not turn your back on an angry Fjerdan.
Helvar looked like he was seriously considering shooting her. Jesper lifted
his revolver, prepared to bring the giant down. Then Helvar was standing
next to Nina, aiming into the maze of crates beyond. Just like that they were
fighting side by side. Had Kaz left Matthias bound with Nina deliberately?
Jesper could never tell how much of what Kaz got away with was smarts
and planning and how much was dumb luck.
He gave a sharp whistle. Nina glanced over her shoulder, and her gaze
found Jesper ’s. He flashed two fingers, twice, and she gave a quick nod.
Had she known berth twenty-two was their real destination? Had Inej? Kaz
was at it again, playing with information, keeping one or all of them blind
and guessing. Jesper hated it, but he couldn’t argue with the fact that they
still had a way to get to Fjerda. If they lived to board the second schooner.
He signalled to Wylan, and they continued to make their way past the boats
and ships moored along the dock, keeping as low as possible.
“There!” he heard a voice shout from somewhere behind him. They’d been
spotted.
“Damn it,” Jesper said. “Run!”
They pounded down the dock. There, at berth twenty-two, was a trimlooking schooner with Ferolind written on its side. It was almost eerie how
much it looked like the other boat. No lanterns had been lit aboard it, but as
he and Wylan bolted up the ramp, two sailors emerged.
“You’re the first ones here,” said Rotty.
“Let’s hope we’re not the last. Are you armed?”
He nodded. “Brekker told us to stay hidden until—”
“This is until,” Jesper said pointing to the men storming towards them on
the dock and snatching his rifle back from Wylan. “I need to get to high
ground. Keep them back and distracted as long as you can.”
“Jesper—” began Wylan.
“No one gets past you. If they take down this schooner, we’re done for.”
The men gunning for them didn’t just care about keeping the Dregs from
leaving the harbour. They wanted them dead.
Jesper fired at the two men leading the charge down the dock. One fell and
the other rolled left and took cover behind the bowsprit of a fishing boat.
Jesper squeezed off three more shots, then sprinted up the mast.
Below he could hear more gunfire erupt. Ten feet up, twenty, boots catching
in the rigging. He should have stopped to take them off. He was two feet
from the crow’s nest when he felt a hot blade of pain sear through the flesh
of his thigh. His foot slipped and for a moment he dangled above the distant
deck with nothing but his slippery palms clinging to the ropes. He forced
his legs to work and sought purchase with the toes of his boots. His right
leg was nearly worthless from the gunshot, and he had to pull himself up
the last few feet with his arms trembling and his heart pounding in his ears.
Every one of his senses felt as if it was on fire. Definitely better than a
winning streak at the tables.
He didn’t stop to rest. He hooked his bad leg in the rigging, ignoring the
pain, checked the sight on his rifle, and began picking off anyone in range.
Four million kruge, he told himself as he reloaded and found another enemy
in his sights. The mist made visibility poor, but this was the skill that had
kept him in the Dregs even after his debts had mounted and it had become
clear that Jesper loved the cards more than luck loved him. Four million
kruge would erase his debt and land him in clover for a good long while.
He spotted Nina and Matthias trying to make their way onto the pier, but at
least ten men were in their way. Kaz seemed to be running in the opposite
direction, and Inej was nowhere to be found, though that didn’t mean much
when it came to the Wraith. She could be hanging from the sails two feet
away from him, and he probably wouldn’t know it.
“Jesper!”
The shout came from far below, and it took a moment for Jesper to realise it
was Wylan calling to him. He tried to ignore him, taking aim again.
“Jesper!”
I’m going to kill that little idiot. “What do you want?” he shouted down.
“Close your eyes!”
“You can’t kiss me from down there, Wylan.”
“Just do it!”
“This better be good!” He shut his eyes.
“Are they closed?”
“Damn it, Wylan, yes, they’re—”
There was a shrill, shrieking howl, and then bright light bloomed behind
Jesper ’s lids. When it faded, he opened his eyes.
Below, he saw men blundering around, rendered blind by the flash bomb
Wylan had set off. But Jesper could see perfectly. Not bad for a mercher’s
kid, he thought to himself, and opened fire.
Before Inej had ever set foot on the high wire or even a practice rope, her
father had taught her to fall – to protect her head and minimise the impact
by not fighting her own momentum. Even as the blast from the harbour
lifted her off her feet, she was tucking into a roll. She hit hard, but she was
up in seconds, pressed against the side of a crate, her ears ringing, her nose
singed by the sharp scent of gunpowder.
Inej spared Kaz and the others a single glance, then did what she did best –
she vanished. She launched herself up the cargo crates, scaling them like a
nimble insect, her rubber-soled feet finding grips and footholds.
The view from above was disturbing. The Dregs were outnumbered, and
there were men working
their way around their left and right flanks. Kaz had been right to keep their
real point of departure a secret from the others. Someone had talked. Inej
had tried to keep tabs on the team, but someone else in the gang could have
been snooping. Kaz had said it himself: Everything in Ketterdam leaked,
including the Slat and the Crow Club.
Someone was firing down from the masts of the new Ferolind. Hopefully,
that meant Jesper had made it to the schooner, and she just had to buy the
others enough time to make it there as well.
Inej ran lightly over the tops of the crates, making her way down the row,
seeking her targets below. It was easy enough. None of them expected the
threat to come from above. She slid to the ground behind two men firing at
Nina, and said a silent prayer as she slit one throat, then the next.
When the second man dropped, she crouched beside him and rolled up his
right sleeve – a tattoo of a hand, its first and second fingers cut off at the
knuckle. Black Tips. Was this retribution for Kaz’s showdown with Geels,
or something more? They shouldn’t have been able to raise these kinds of
numbers.
She moved on to the next aisle of crates, following a mental map of the
other attackers’ positions.
First, she took down a girl holding a massive, unwieldy rifle, then skewered
the man who was supposed to be watching her flank. His tattoo showed five
birds in a wedge formation: Razorgulls.
Just how many gangs were they up against?
The next corner was blind. Should she scale the cargo containers to check
her position or risk what might be waiting for her on the other side? She
took a deep breath, sank low, and slipped around the corner in a lunge.
Tonight her Saints were kind – two men were firing on the docks with their
backs to her. She dispatched them with two quick thrusts of her blades. Six
bodies, six lives taken. She was going to have to do a lot of penance, but
she’d helped even the odds a bit in the Dregs’ favour. Now, she needed to
get to the schooner.
She wiped her knives on her leather breeches and returned them to their
sheaths, then backed up and took a running start at the nearest cargo
container. As her fingers gripped the rim, she felt a piercing pain beneath
her arm. She turned in time to see Oomen’s ugly face split in a determined
grimace. All the intelligence she had gathered on the Black Tips came back
to her in a sickening rush
– Oomen, Geels’ shambling enforcer, the one who could crush skulls with
his bare hands.
He yanked her down and grabbed the front of her vest, giving the knife in
her side a sharp twist.
Inej fought not to black out.
As her hood fell back, he exclaimed, “Ghezen! I’ve got Brekker ’s Wraith.”
“You should have aimed … higher,” Inej gasped. “Missed my heart.”
“Don’t want you dead, Wraith,” he said. “You’re quite the prize. Can’t wait
to hear all the gossip you’ve gathered for Dirtyhands, and all his secrets,
too. I love a good story.”
“I can tell you how this one ends,” she said on an unsteady breath. “But
you’re not going to like it.”
“That so?” He slammed her up against the crate, and pain crashed through
her. Her toes only brushed the ground as blood spurted from the wound at
her side. Oomen’s forearm was braced against her shoulders, keeping her
arms pinned.
“Do you know the secret to fighting a scorpion?”
He laughed. “Talking nonsense, Wraith? Don’t die too quick. Need to get
you patched up.”
She crossed one ankle behind the other and heard a reassuring click. She
wore the pads at her knees for crawling and climbing, but there was another
reason, too – namely, the tiny steel blades hidden in each of them.
“The secret,” she panted, “is to never take your eyes off the scorpion’s tail.”
She brought her knee up, jamming the blade between Oomen’s legs.
He shrieked and released her, hands going to his bleeding groin.
She staggered back down the row of crates. She could hear men shouting to
each other, the pop of gunfire coming in smatters and bursts now. Who was
winning? Had the others made it to the schooner? A wave of dizziness
rolled over her.
When she touched her fingers to the wound at her side, they came away
wet. Too much blood.
Footsteps. Someone was coming. She couldn’t climb, not with this wound,
not with the amount of blood she’d lost. She remembered her father putting
her on the rope ladder the first time. Climb, Inej.
The cargo containers were stacked like a pyramid here. If she could make it
up just one, she could hide herself on the first level. Just one. She could
climb or she could stand there and die.
She willed her mind to clarity and hopped up, fingertips latching onto the
top of the crate. Climb, Inej. She dragged herself over the edge onto the tin
roof of the container.
It felt so good to lie there, but she knew she’d left a trail of blood behind
her. One more, she told herself. One more and you’ll be safe. She forced
herself up to her knees and reached for the next crate.
The surface beneath her began to rock. She heard laughter from below.
“Come out, come out, Wraith! We have secrets to tell!”
Desperately, she reached for the lip of the next crate again and gripped it,
fighting through an onslaught of pain as the container under her dropped
away. Then she was just hanging, legs dangling helplessly down. They
didn’t open fire; they wanted her alive.
“Come on down, Wraith!”
She didn’t know where the strength came from but she managed to pull
herself over the top. She lay on the crate’s roof, panting.
Just one more. But she couldn’t. Couldn’t push to her knees, couldn’t reach,
couldn’t even roll. It hurt too much. Climb, Inej.
“I can’t, Papa,” she whispered. Even now she hated to disappoint him.
Move, she told herself. This is a stupid place to die. And yet a voice in her
head said there were worse places. She would die here, in freedom, beneath
the beginnings of dawn. She’d die after a worthy fight, not because some
man had tired of her or required more from her than she could give.
Better to die here by her own blade than with her face painted and her body
swathed in false silks.
A hand seized her ankle. They’d climbed the crates. Why hadn’t she heard
them? Was she that far gone? They had her. Someone was turning her onto
her back.
She slid the dagger from the sheath at her wrist. In the Barrel, a blade this
sharp was known as kind steel. It meant a quick death. Better that than
torture at the mercy of the Black Tips or the Razorgulls.
May the Saints receive me. She pressed the tip beneath her breast, between
her ribs, an arrow to her heart. Then a hand gripped her wrist painfully,
forcing her to drop the blade.
“Not just yet, Inej.”
The rasp of stone on stone. Her eyes flew open. Kaz.
He bundled her into his arms and leaped down from the crates, landing
roughly, his bad leg buckling.
She moaned as they hit the ground.
“Did we win?”
“I’m here, aren’t I?”
He must be running. Her body jounced painfully against his chest with
every lurching step. He needed his cane.
“I don’t want to die.”
“I’ll do my best to make other arrangements for you.”
She closed her eyes.
“Keep talking, Wraith. Don’t slip away from me.”
“But it’s what I do best.”
He clutched her tighter. “Just make it to the schooner. Open your damn
eyes, Inej.”
She tried. Her vision was blurring, but she could make out a pale, shiny scar
on Kaz’s neck, right beneath his jaw. She remembered the first time she’d
seen him at the Menagerie. He paid Tante Heleen for information – stock
tips, political pillow talk, anything the Menagerie’s clients blabbed about
when drunk or giddy on bliss. He never visited Heleen’s girls, though
plenty would have been happy to take him up to their rooms. They claimed
he gave them the shivers, that his hands were permanently stained with
blood beneath those black gloves, but she’d recognised the eagerness in
their voices and the way they tracked him with their eyes.
One night, as he’d passed her in the parlour, she’d done a foolish thing, a
reckless thing. “I can help you,” she’d whispered. He’d glanced at her, then
proceeded on his way as if she’d said nothing at all. The next morning,
she’d been called to Tante Heleen’s parlour. She’d been sure another
beating was coming or worse, but instead Kaz Brekker had been standing
there, leaning on his crow-head cane, waiting to change her life.
“I can help you,” she said now.
“Help me with what?”
She couldn’t remember. There was something she was supposed to tell him.
It didn’t matter any more.
“Talk to me, Wraith.”
“You came back for me.”
“I protect my investments.”
Investments. “I’m glad I’m bleeding all over your shirt.”
“I’ll put it on your tab.”
Now she remembered. He owed her an apology. “Say you’re sorry.”
“For what?”
“Just say it.”
She didn’t hear his reply. The world had grown very dark indeed.
“Get us out of here,” Kaz shouted as soon as he limped aboard the schooner
with Inej in his arms.
The sails were already trimmed, and they were on their way out of the
harbour in moments, though not nearly as fast as he would have liked. He
knew he should have tried to secure some Squallers for the journey, but
they were hell to come by.
There was chaos on deck, people shouting and trying to get the schooner
into open sea as quickly as possible.
“Specht!” he yelled at the man he’d chosen to captain the vessel, a sailor
with a talent for knifework who had fallen on hard times and ended up
stuck in the lower ranks of the Dregs. “Get your crew in shape before I start
cracking skulls.”
Specht saluted – then seemed to catch himself. He wasn’t in the navy any
longer, and Kaz wasn’t a commanding officer.
The pain in Kaz’s leg was terrible, the worst it had been since he’d first
broken it falling off the roof of a bank near the Geldstraat. It was possible
he’d fractured the bone again. Inej’s weight wasn’t helping, but when Jesper
stepped into his path to offer help, Kaz shoved past him.
“Where’s Nina?” Kaz snarled.
“Seeing to the wounded below. She already took care of me.” Dimly Kaz
registered the dried blood on Jesper ’s thigh. “Wylan got dinged during the
fight. Let me help you—”
“Get out of my way,” Kaz said, and plunged past him down the ramp that
led belowdecks.
He found Nina tending to Wylan in a narrow cabin, her hands drifting over
his arm, knitting the flesh of the bullet wound together. It was barely a
graze.
“Move,” Kaz demanded, and Wylan practically leaped from the table.
“I’m not finished—” began Nina. Then she caught sight of Inej. “Saints,”
she swore. “What happened?”
“Knife wound.”
The cramped cabin was lit by several bright lanterns and a stash of clean
bandages had been laid out on a shelf beside a bottle of camphor. Gently,
Kaz placed Inej on the table that had been bolted to the deck.
“That’s a lot of blood,” Nina said on a low breath.
“Help her.”
“Kaz, I’m a Heartrender, not a real Healer.”
“She’ll be dead by the time we find one. Get to work.”
“You’re in my light.”
Kaz stepped back into the passageway. Inej lay perfectly still on the table,
her luminous brown skin dull in the swaying lamplight.
He was alive because of Inej. They all were. They’d managed to fight their
way out of a corner, but only because she’d prevented them from being
surrounded. Kaz knew death. He could feel its presence on the ship now,
looming over them, ready to take his Wraith. He was covered in her blood.
“Unless you can be useful, go away,” Nina said without looking up at him.
“You’re making me nervous.” He hesitated, then stomped back the way
he’d come, stopping to purloin a clean shirt from another cabin. He
shouldn’t be this shaken up by a dock brawl, even a shoot-out, but he was.
Something inside him felt frayed and raw. It was the same feeling he’d had
as a boy, in those first desperate days after Jordie’s death.
Say you’re sorry. That was the last thing Inej had said to him. What had she
wanted him to apologise for? There were so many possibilities. A thousand
crimes. A thousand stupid jibes.
On deck, he took a deep breath of sea air, watching the harbour and
Ketterdam fade from view on the horizon.
“What the hell just happened?” Jesper asked. He was leaning against the
railing, his rifle beside him. hair dishevelled, pupils dilated. He seemed
almost drunk, or like he’d just rolled out of someone’s bed. He always had
that look after a fight. Helvar was bent over the railing, vomiting. Not a
sailor, apparently. At some point they’d need to shackle his legs again.
“We were ambushed,” Wylan said from his perch on the forecastle deck. He
had his sleeve pushed up and was running his fingers over the red spot
where Nina had seen to his wound.
Jesper shot Wylan a withering glare. “Private tutors from the university, and
that’s what this kid comes up with? ‘We were ambushed’?”
Wylan reddened. “Stop calling me kid. We’re practically the same age.”
“You’re not going to like the other names I come up with for you. I know
we were ambushed. That doesn’t explain how they knew we would be
there. Maybe Big Bolliger wasn’t the only Black Tip spy in the Dregs.”
“Geels doesn’t have the brains or the resources to bite back this fast or this
hard alone,” Kaz said.
“You sure? Because it felt like a pretty big bite.”
“Let’s ask.” Kaz limped over to where Rotty had helped him stash Oomen.
I stuck your Wraith, Oomen had giggled when Kaz had spotted him curled
up on the ground. I stuck her good. Kaz had glanced at the blood on
Oomen’s thigh and said, Looks like she got you, too.
But her aim had been off or Oomen wouldn’t have been talking to anyone.
He’d knocked the enforcer out and had Rotty retrieve him while he went to
find Inej.
Now Helvar and Jesper dragged Oomen over to the rail, his hands bound.
“Stand him up.”
With one huge hand, Helvar hauled Oomen to his feet.
Oomen grinned, his thatch of coarse white hair flat against his wide
forehead.
“Why don’t you tell me what brought so many Black Tips out in force
tonight?” Kaz said.
“We owed you.”
“A public brawl with guns out and thirty men packing? I don’t think so.”
Oomen snickered. “Geels doesn’t like being bested.”
“I could fit Geels’ brains in the toe of my boot, and Big Bolliger was his
only source inside the Dregs.”
“Maybe he—”
Kaz interrupted him. “I want you to think real careful now, Oomen. Geels
probably thinks you’re dead, so there are no rules of barter here. I can do
what I want with you.”
Oomen spat in his face.
Kaz took a handkerchief from his coat pocket and carefully wiped his face
clean. He thought of Inej lying still on the table, her slight weight in his
arms.
“Hold him,” he told Jesper and the Fjerdan. Kaz flicked his coat sleeve, and
an oyster shucking knife appeared in his hand. At any given time he had at
least two knives stashed somewhere in his clothes. He didn’t even count
this one, really – a tidy, wicked little blade.
He made a neat slash across Oomen’s eye – from brow to cheekbone – and
before Oomen could
draw breath to cry out, he made a second cut in the opposite direction, a
nearly perfect X. Now Oomen was screaming.
Kaz wiped the knife clean, returned it to his sleeve, and drove his gloved
fingers into Oomen’s eye socket. He shrieked and twitched as Kaz yanked
out his eyeball, its base trailing a bloody root. Blood gushed over his face.
Kaz heard Wylan retching. He tossed the eyeball overboard and jammed his
spit-soaked handkerchief into the socket where Oomen’s eye had been.
Then he grabbed Oomen’s jaw, his gloves leaving red smears on the
enforcer ’s chin. His actions were smooth, precise, as if he were dealing
cards at the Crow Club or picking an easy lock, but his rage felt hot and
mad and unfamiliar.
Something within him had torn loose.
“Listen to me,” he hissed, his face inches from Oomen’s. “You have two
choices. You tell me what I want to know, and we drop you at our next port
with your pockets full of enough coin to get you sewn up and buy you
passage back to Kerch. Or I take the other eye, and I repeat this
conversation with a blind man.”
“It was just a job,” babbled Oomen. “Geels got five thousand kruge to bring
the Black Tips out in force. We pulled in some Razorgulls, too.”
“Then why not more men? Why not double your odds?”
“You were supposed to be on the boat when it blew! We were just supposed
to take care of the stragglers.”
“Who hired you?”
Oomen wavered, sucking on his lip, snot running from his nose.
“Don’t make me ask again, Oomen,” Kaz said quietly. “Whoever it was
can’t protect you now.”
“He’ll kill me.”
“And I’ll make you wish for death, so you have to weigh those options.”
“Pekka Rollins,” Oomen sobbed. “It was Pekka Rollins!”
Even through his own shock, Kaz registered the effect of the name on
Jesper and Wylan. Helvar
didn’t know enough to be intimidated.
“Saints,” groaned Jesper. “We are so screwed.”
“Is Rollins leading the crew himself?” Kaz asked Oomen.
“What crew?”
“To Fjerda.”
“I don’t know about no crew. We were just supposed to stop you from
getting out of the harbour.”
“I see.”
“I need a medik. Can you take me to a medik now?”
“Of course,” said Kaz. “Right this way.” He took Oomen by the lapels and
hoisted him off his feet, bracing his body against the railing.
“I told you what you wanted!” Oomen screamed, struggling. “I did what
you asked!”
Despite Oomen’s knobby build, he was deceptively strong – farm strong
like Jesper. He’d probably grown up in the fields.
Kaz leaned in so that no one else could hear it when he said, “My Wraith
would counsel mercy. But thanks to you, she’s not here to plead your case.”
Without another word, he tipped Oomen into the sea.
“No!” Wylan shouted, leaning over the railing, his face pale, stunned eyes
tracking Oomen in the waves. The enforcer ’s pleas were still audible as his
maimed face faded from view.
“You … you said if he helped you—”
“Do you want to go over, too?” asked Kaz.
Wylan took a deep breath as if sucking in courage and sputtered, “You
won’t throw me overboard.
You need me.”
Why do people keep saying that? “Maybe,” said Kaz. “But I’m not in a very
rational mood.”
Jesper set his hand on Wylan’s shoulder. “Let it go.”
“It’s not right—”
“Wylan,” Jesper said, giving him a little shake. “Maybe your tutors didn’t
cover this lesson, but you do not argue with a man covered in blood and a
knife up his sleeve.”
Wylan pressed his lips into a thin line. Kaz couldn’t tell if the kid was
frightened or furious, and he didn’t much care. Helvar stood silent sentinel,
observing it all, looking seasick green beneath his blond beard.
Kaz turned to Jesper. “Fit Helvar with some shackles to keep him honest,”
he said as he headed below. “And get me clean clothes and fresh water.”
“Since when am I your valet?”
“Man with a knife, remember?” he said over his shoulder.
“Man with a gun!” Jesper called after him.
Kaz replied with a time-saving gesture that relied heavily on his middle
finger and disappeared belowdecks. He wanted a hot bath and a bottle of
brandy, but he’d settle for being alone and free of the stink of blood for a
while.
Pekka Rollins. The name rattled through his head like gunfire. It always
came back to Pekka Rollins, the man who had taken everything from him.
The man who now stood between Kaz and the
biggest haul any crew had ever attempted. Would Rollins send someone in
his place or lead the crew to nab Bo Yul-Bayur himself?
In the dim confines of his cabin, Kaz whispered the words “Brick by brick.”
Killing Pekka Rollins had always been tempting, but that wasn’t enough.
Kaz wanted Rollins brought low. He wanted him to suffer the way Kaz had,
the way Jordie had. And snatching thirty million kruge right out of Pekka
Rollins’ grubby hands was a very good way to start. Maybe Inej was right.
Maybe fate did bother with people like him.
In the cramped little surgeon’s cabin, Nina tried to put Inej’s body back
together, but she hadn’t been trained for this type of work.
For the first two years of their education in Ravka’s capital, all Grisha
Corporalki studied together, took the same classes, performed the same
autopsies. But then their training diverged. Healers learned the intricate
work of healing wounds, while Heartrenders became soldiers – experts at
doing damage, not undoing it. It was a different way of thinking about what
was essentially the same power. But the living asked more of you than the
dead. A killing stroke took decision, clarity of intent. Healing was slow,
deliberate, a rhythm that required thoughtful study of each small choice.
The jobs she’d done for Kaz over the last year helped, and in a way so had
her work carefully altering moods and tailoring faces at the White Rose.
But looking down at Inej, Nina wished her own school training hadn’t been
so abbreviated. The Ravkan civil war had erupted when she was still a
student at the Little Palace, and she and her classmates had been forced to
go into hiding. When the fighting had ended and the dust had settled, King
Nikolai had been anxious to get the few remaining Grisha soldiers trained
and in the field, so Nina had spent only six months in advanced classes
before she’d been sent out on her first mission. At the time, she’d been
thrilled. Now she would have been grateful for even another week of
school.
Inej was lithe, all muscle and fine bones, built like an acrobat. The knife
had entered beneath her left arm. It had been a very close thing. A little
deeper and the blade would have pierced the apex of the heart.
Nina knew that if she simply sealed Inej’s skin the way she’d done with
Wylan, the girl would just continue to bleed internally, so she’d tried to stop
the bleeding from the inside out. She thought she’d managed it well
enough, but Inej had lost a lot of blood, and Nina had no idea what to do
about that.
She’d heard some Healers could match one person’s blood to another ’s, but
if it was done incorrectly, it was as good as poisoning the patient. The
process was far beyond her.
She finished closing the wound, then covered Inej with a light wool blanket.
For now, all Nina could do was monitor her pulse and breathing. As she
settled Inej’s arms beneath the blanket, Nina saw the scarred flesh on the
inside of her forearm. She brushed her thumb gently over the bumps and
ridges. It must have been the peacock feather, the tattoo borne by members
of the Menagerie, the House of Exotics. Whoever had removed it had done
an ugly job of it.
Curious, Nina pushed up Inej’s other sleeve. The skin there was smooth and
unmarked. Inej hadn’t taken on the crow and cup, the tattoo carried by any
full member of the Dregs. Alliances shifted this way and that in the Barrel,
but your gang was your family, the only protection that mattered. Nina
herself bore two tattoos. The one on her left forearm was for the House of
the White Rose. The one that counted was on her right: a crow trying to
drink from a near empty goblet. It told the world she belonged to the Dregs,
that to trifle with her was to risk their vengeance.
Inej had been with the Dregs longer than Nina and yet no tattoo. Strange.
She was one of the most valued members of the gang, and it was clear Kaz
trusted her – as much as someone like Kaz could.
Nina thought of the look on his face when he’d set Inej down on the table.
He was the same Kaz –
cold, rude, impossible – but beneath all that anger, she thought she’d seen
something else, too. Or maybe she was just a romantic.
She had to laugh at herself. She wouldn’t wish love on anyone. It was the
guest you welcomed and then couldn’t be rid of.
Nina brushed Inej’s straight black hair back from her face. “Please be
okay,” she whispered. She hated the frail waver of her voice in the cabin.
She didn’t sound like a Grisha soldier or a hardened member of the Dregs.
She sounded like a little girl who didn’t know what she was doing. And that
was exactly how she felt. Her training had been too short. She’d been sent
out on her first mission too soon. Zoya had said as much at the time, but
Nina had begged to go, and they’d needed her, so the older Grisha had
relented.
Zoya Nazyalensky – a powerful Squaller, gorgeous to the point of absurdity,
and capable of reducing Nina’s confidence to ash with a single raised brow.
Nina had worshipped her. Reckless, foolish, easily distracted. Zoya had
called her all those things and worse.
“You were right, Zoya. Happy now?”
“Giddy,” said Jesper from the doorway.
Nina started and looked up to see him rocking back and forth on the balls of
his feet. “Who’s Zoya?” he asked.
Nina slumped back in her chair. “No one. A member of the Grisha
Triumvirate.”
“Fancy. The ones who run the Second Army?”
“What’s left of it.” Ravka’s Grisha soldiers had been decimated during the
war. Some had fled.
Most had been killed. Nina rubbed her tired eyes. “Do you know the best
way to find Grisha who don’t want to be found?”
Jesper scrubbed the back of his neck, touched his hands to his guns,
returned to his neck. He always seemed to be in motion. “Never gave it
much thought,” he said.
“Look for miracles and listen to bedtime stories.” Follow the tales of
witches and goblins, and unexplained happenings. Sometimes they were
just superstition. But often there was truth at the heart of local legends –
people who had been born with gifts that their countries didn’t understand.
Nina had become very good at sniffing out those stories.
“Seems to me if they don’t want to be found, you should just let them be.”
Nina cast him a dark glance. “The drüskelle won’t let them be. They hunt
Grisha everywhere.”
“Are they all charmers like Matthias?”
“And worse.”
“I need to find his leg shackles. Kaz gives me all the fun jobs.”
“Want to trade?” Nina asked wearily.
The frenetic energy of Jesper ’s lanky frame seemed to drop away. He went
as still as Nina had ever seen him, and his gaze focused on Inej for the first
time since he’d entered the little cabin. He was avoiding it, Nina realised.
He didn’t want to look at her. The blankets shifted slightly with her shallow
breaths. When Jesper spoke, his voice was taut, the strings of an instrument
tuned to a too-sharp key.
“She can’t die,” he said. “Not this way.”
Nina peered at Jesper, puzzled. “Not what way?”
“She can’t die,” he repeated.
Nina felt a surge of frustration. She was torn between wanting to hug Jesper
tight and scream at him that she was trying. “Saints, Jesper,” she said. “I’m
doing my best.”
He shifted, and his body seemed to come back alive. “Sorry,” he said a bit
sheepishly. He clapped her awkwardly on the shoulder. “You’re doing
great.”
Nina sighed. “Not convincing. Why don’t you go chain up a giant blond?”
Jesper saluted and ducked out of the cabin.
Annoying as he was, Nina was almost tempted to call him back. With
Jesper gone, there was nothing but Zoya’s voice in her head and the
reminder that her best wasn’t good enough.
Inej’s skin felt too cool to the touch. Nina laid a hand on each of the girl’s
shoulders and tried to improve her blood flow, raising her body temperature
very slightly.
She hadn’t been completely honest with Jesper. The Grisha Triumvirate
hadn’t just wanted to save Grisha from Fjerdan witchhunters. They’d sent
missions to the Wandering Isle and Novyi Zem because Ravka needed
soldiers. They’d sought out Grisha who might be living in secret and tried
to convince them to take up residence in Ravka and enter service to the
crown.
Nina had been too young to fight in the Ravkan civil war, and she’d been
desperate to be part of the rebuilding of the Second Army. It was her gift for
languages – Shu, Kaelish, Suli, Fjerdan, even some Zemeni – that finally
overcame Zoya’s reservations. She agreed to let Nina accompany her and a
team of Grisha Examiners to the Wandering Isle, and despite all of Zoya’s
misgivings, Nina had been a success. Disguised as a traveller, she would
slip into taverns and coach houses to eavesdrop on conversations and chat
with the locals, then bring the peasant talk back to camp.
If you’re going to Maroch Glen, make sure to travel by day. Troubled spirits
walk those lands –
storms erupt out of nowhere.
The Witch of Fells is real, all right. My second cousin went to her with an
outbreak of tsifil and swears he’s never been healthier. What do you mean
he’s not right in the head? More right than you’ll ever be.
They’d found two Grisha families hiding out in the supposed fairy caves of
Istamere, and they’d saved a mother, father, and two boys – Inferni, who
could control fire – from a mob in Fenford. They even raided a slaving ship
near the port in Leflin. Once the refugees had been sorted, those without
powers had been offered safe passage back home. Those whose powers had
been confirmed by a Grisha Examiner were offered asylum in Ravka. Only
the old Heartrender known as the Witch of Fells chose to remain. “If they
want my blood, let them come for it,” she’d laughed. “I’ll take some of
theirs in return.”
Nina spoke Kaelish like a native and loved the challenge of taking on a new
identity in every town.
But for all their triumphs, Zoya hadn’t been pleased. “Being good with
languages isn’t enough,” she’d scolded. “You need to learn to be less …
big. You’re too loud, too effusive, too memorable. You take too many
risks.”
“Zoya,” said the Examiner they were travelling with. “Go easy.” He was a
living amplifier. Dead, his bones would have served to heighten Grisha
power, no different from the shark teeth or bear claws that other Grisha
wore. But alive, he was invaluable to their mission, trained to use his
amplifier gifts to sense Grisha power through touch.
Most of the time, Zoya was protective of him, but now her deep blue eyes
flattened to slits. “My teachers didn’t go easy on me. If she ends up chased
through the woods by a mob of peasants, will you tell them to go easy?”
Nina had stomped off, pride smarting, embarrassed by the tears filling her
eyes. Zoya had shouted at her not to go past the ridge, but she’d ignored
her, eager to be as far away from the Squaller as she could get – and walked
right into a drüskelle camp. Six blond boys all speaking Fjerdan, clustered
on a cliff above the shore. They’d made no campfire and were dressed as
Kaelish peasants, but she’d known what they were right away.
They’d stared at her for a long moment, lit only by silvery moonlight.
“Oh thank goodness,” she’d said in lilting Kaelish. “I’m travelling with my
family, and I got turned around in the woods. Can one of you help me find
the road?”
“I think she’s lost,” one of them translated in Fjerdan for the others.
Another rose, a lantern in his hand. He was taller than the others, and all her
instincts screamed at her to run as he drew closer. They don’t know what you
are, she reminded herself. You’re just a nice Kaelish girl, lost in the woods.
Don’t do anything stupid. Lead him away from the others, then take him
down.
He raised his lantern, the light shining over both of their faces. His hair was
long and burnished gold, and his pale blue eyes glinted like ice beneath a
winter sun. He looks like a painting, she thought, a Saint wrought in gold
leaf on the walls of a church, born to wield a sword of fire.
“What are you doing out here?” he asked in Fjerdan.
She feigned confusion. “I’m sorry,” she said in Kaelish. “I don’t
understand. I’m lost.”
He lunged towards her. She didn’t stop to think, but simply reacted, raising
her hands to attack. He was too quick. Without hesitation, he dropped the
lantern and seized her wrists, slamming her hands together, making it
impossible for her to use her power.
“Drüsje,” he said with satisfaction. Witch. He had a wolf’s smile.
The attack had been a test. A girl lost in the woods cowered; she reached
for a knife or a gun. She didn’t try to use her hands to stop a man’s heart.
Reckless. Impulsive.
This was why Zoya hadn’t wanted to bring her. Properly trained Grisha
didn’t make these mistakes.
Nina had been a fool, but she didn’t have to be a traitor. She pleaded with
them in Kaelish, not Ravkan, and she didn’t cry out for help – not when
they bound her hands, not when they threatened her, not when they tossed
her in a rowboat like a bag of millet. She wanted to scream her terror, bring
Zoya running, beg for someone to save her, but she wouldn’t risk the
others’ lives. The drüskelle rowed her to a ship anchored off the coast and
threw her into a cage belowdecks full of other captive Grisha.
That was when the real horror had begun.
Night blended into day in the dank belly of the ship. The Grisha prisoners’
hands were kept tightly bound to keep them from using their power. They
were fed tough bread crawling with weevils – only enough to keep them
alive – and had to ration fresh water carefully since they never knew when
they might have it next. They’d been given no place to relieve themselves,
and the stink of bodies and worse was nearly unbearable.
Occasionally the ship would drop anchor, and the drüskelle would return
with another captive. The Fjerdans would stand outside their cages, eating
and drinking, mocking their filthy clothes and the way they smelled. As bad
as it was, the fear of what might await them was much more frightening –
the inquisitors at the Ice Court, torture, and inevitably death. Nina dreamed
of being burned alive on a pyre and woke up screaming. Nightmare and fear
and the delirium of hunger tangled together so that she stopped being
certain of what was real and what wasn’t.
Then one day, the drüskelle had crowded into the hold dressed in freshly
pressed uniforms of black and silver, the white wolf’s head on their sleeves.
They’d fallen into orderly ranks and stood at attention as their commander
entered. Like all of them, he was tall, but he wore a tidy beard, and his long
blond hair showed grey at the temples. He walked the length of the hold,
then came to a halt in front of the prisoners.
“How many?” he asked.
“Fifteen,” replied the burnished gold boy who had captured her. It was the
first time she had seen him in the hold.
The commanding officer cleared his throat and clasped his hands behind his
back. “I am Jarl Brum.”
A tremor of fear passed through Nina, and she felt it reverberate through the
Grisha in the cell, a warning call none of them were free to heed.
In school, Nina had been obsessed with the drüskelle. They’d been the
creatures of her nightmares with their white wolves and their cruel knives
and the horses they bred for battle with Grisha. It was why she’d studied to
perfect her Fjerdan and her knowledge of their culture. It had been a way of
preparing herself for them, for the battle to come. And Jarl Brum was the
worst of them.
He was a legend, the monster waiting in the dark. The drüskelle had existed
for hundreds of years, but under Brum’s leadership, their force had doubled
in size and become infinitely more deadly. He had changed their training,
developed new techniques for rooting out Grisha in Fjerda, infiltrated
Ravka’s borders, and begun pursuing rogue Grisha in other lands, even
hunting down slaving ships,
‘liberating’ Grisha captives with the sole purpose of clapping them back in
chains and sending them to Fjerda for trial and execution. She’d imagined
facing Brum one day as an avenging warrior or a clever spy. She hadn’t
pictured herself confronting him caged and starving, hands bound, dressed
in rags.
Brum must have known the effect his name would have. He waited a long
moment before he said in excellent Kaelish, “What stands before you is the
next generation of drüskelle, the holy order charged with protecting the
sovereign nation of Fjerda by eradicating your kind. They will bring you to
Fjerda to face trial and so earn the rank of officer. They are the strongest
and best of our kind.”
Bullies, Nina thought.
“When we reach Fjerda, you will be interrogated and tried for your crimes.”
“Please,” said one of the prisoners. “I’ve done nothing. I’m a farmer. I’ve
done you no harm.”
“You are an insult to Djel,” Brum replied. “A blight on this earth. You
speak peace, but what of your children to whom you may pass on this
demonic power? What about their children? I save my mercy for the
helpless men and women mowed down by Grisha abominations.”
He faced the drüskelle. “Good work, lads,” he said in Fjerdan. “We sail for
Djerholm immediately.”
The drüskelle seemed ready to burst with pride. As soon as Brum exited the
hold, they were knocking each other affectionately on the shoulders,
laughing in relief and satisfaction.
“Good work is right,” one said in Fjerdan. “Fifteen Grisha to deliver to the
Ice Court!”
“If this doesn’t earn us our teeth—”
“You know it will.”
“Good, I’m sick of shaving every morning.”
“I’m going to grow a beard down to my navel.”
Then one of them reached through the bars and snatched Nina up by her
hair. “I like this one, still nice and round. Maybe we should open that cage
door and hose her down.”
The boy with the burnished hair smacked his comrade’s hand away.
“What’s wrong with you?” he
said, the first time he’d spoken since Brum had vanished. The brief rush of
gratitude she’d felt
withered when he said, “Would you fornicate with a dog?”
“What does the dog look like?”
The others roared with laughter as they headed above. The golden one
who’d likened her to an animal was the last to go, and just as he was about
to step into the passage, she said in crisp, perfect Fjerdan, “What crimes?”
He stilled, and when he’d looked back at her, his blue eyes had been bright
with hate. She refused to flinch.
“How do you come to speak my language? Did you serve on Ravka’s
northern border?”
“I’m Kaelish,” she lied, “and I can speak any language.”
“More witchcraft.”
“If by witchcraft, you mean the arcane practice of reading. Your
commander said we’d be tried for our crimes. I want you to tell me just
what crime I’ve committed.”
“You’ll be tried for espionage and crimes against the people.”
“We are not criminals,” said a Fabrikator in halting Fjerdan from his place
on the floor. He’d been there the longest and was too weak to rise. “We are
ordinary people – farmers, teachers.”
Not me, Nina thought grimly. I’m a soldier.
“You’ll have a trial,” said the drüskelle. “You’ll be treated more fairly than
your kind deserve.”
“How many Grisha are ever found innocent?” Nina asked.
The Fabrikator groaned. “Don’t provoke him. You will not sway his mind.”
But she gripped the bars with her bound hands and said, “How many? How
many have you sent to
the pyre?”
He turned his back on her.
“Wait!”
He ignored her.
“Wait! Please! Just … just some fresh water. Would you treat your dogs like
this?”
He paused, his hand on the door. “I shouldn’t have said that. Dogs know
loyalty, at least. Fidelity to the pack. It is an insult to the dog to call you
one.”
I’m going to feed you to a pack of hungry hounds, Nina thought. But all she
said was, “Water.
Please.”
He vanished into the passage. She heard him climb the ladder, and the hatch
closed with a loud bang.
“Don’t waste your breath on him,” the Fabrikator counselled. “He will
show you no kindness.”
But a short while later the drüskelle returned with a tin cup and a bucket of
clean water. He’d set it down inside the cell and slammed the bars shut
without a word. Nina helped the Fabrikator drink, then gulped down a cup
herself. Her hands were shaking so badly, half of it sloshed down her
blouse. The Fjerdan turned away, and with pleasure, Nina saw she’d
embarrassed him.
“I’d kill for a bath,” she taunted. “You could wash me.”
“Don’t talk to me,” he growled, already stalking towards the door.
He hadn’t returned, and they’d gone without fresh water for the next three
days. But when the storm hit, that tin cup had saved her life.
Nina’s chin dipped, and she jerked awake. Had she nodded off?
Matthias was standing in the passage outside the cabin. He filled the
doorway, far too tall to be comfortable belowdecks. How long had he been
watching her? Quickly, Nina checked Inej’s pulse and breathing, relieved to
find that she seemed to be stable for now.
“Was I sleeping?” she asked.
“Dozing.”
She stretched, trying to blink away her exhaustion. “But not snoring?” He
said nothing, just watched her with those ice chip eyes. “They let you have
a razor?”
His shackled hands went to his freshly shaved jaw. “Jesper did it.” Jesper
must have seen to Matthias’ hair, too. The tufts of blond that had grown
raggedly from his scalp had been trimmed down. It was still too short, bare
golden fuzz over skin that showed cuts and bruises from his last fight in
Hellgate.
He must be happy to be free of the beard, though, Nina thought. Until a
drüskelle had accomplished a mission on his own and been granted officer
status, he was required to remain clean-shaven. If Matthias had brought
Nina to face trial at the Ice Court, he would have been granted that
permission.
He would have worn the silver wolf’s head that marked an officer of the
drüskelle. It made her sick to think of it. Congratulations on your recent
advancement to murderer of rank. The thought helped remind her just who
she was dealing with. She sat up straighter, chin lifting.
“Hje marden, Matthias?” she asked.
“Don’t,” he said.
“You’d prefer I spoke Kerch?”
“I don’t want to hear my language from your mouth.” His eyes flicked to
her lips, and she felt an unwelcome flush.
With vindictive pleasure, she said in Fjerdan, “But you always liked the
way I spoke your tongue.
You said it sounded pure.” It was true. He’d loved her accent – the vowels
of a princess, courtesy of her teachers at the Little Palace.
“Don’t press me, Nina,” he said. Matthias’ Kerch was ugly, brutal, the
guttural accent of thieves and murderers that he’d met in prison. “That
pardon is a dream that’s hard to hold on to. The memory of your pulse
fading beneath my fingers is far easier to bring to mind.”
“Try me,” she said, her anger flaring. She was sick of his threats. “My
hands aren’t pinned now, Helvar.” She curled her fingertips, and Matthias
gasped as his heart began to race.
“Witch,” he spat, clutching his chest.
“Surely you can do better than that. You must have a hundred names for me
by now.”
“A thousand,” he grunted as sweat broke out on his brow.
She relaxed her fingers, feeling suddenly embarrassed. What was she
doing? Punishing him?
Toying with him? He had every right to hate her.
“Go away, Matthias. I have a patient to see to.” She focused on checking
Inej’s body temperature.
“Will she live?”
“Do you care?”
“Of course I care. She’s a human being.”
She heard the unspoken end to that sentence. She’s a human being – unlike
you. The Fjerdans didn’t believe the Grisha were human. They weren’t even
on par with animals, but something low and demonic, a blight on the world,
an abomination.
She lifted a shoulder. “I don’t know, really. I did my best, but my gifts lie
elsewhere.”
“Kaz asked you if the White Rose would send a delegation to Hringkälla.”
“You know the White Rose?”
“West Stave is a favourite subject of conversation in Hellgate.”
Nina paused. Then, without saying a word, she pushed up the sleeve of her
shirt. Two roses intertwined on the inside of her forearm. She could have
explained what she’d done there, that she’d never made her living on her
back, but it was none of his business what she did or didn’t do. Let him
believe what he liked.
“You chose to work there?”
“Chose is a bit of a stretch, but yes.”
“Why? Why would you remain in Kerch?”
She rubbed her eyes. “I couldn’t leave you in Hellgate.”
“You put me in Hellgate.”
“It was a mistake, Matthias.”
Rage ignited in his eyes, the calm veneer dropping away. “A mistake? I
saved your life, and you accused me of being a slaver.”
“Yes,” Nina said. “And I’ve spent most of this last year trying to find a way
to set things right.”
“Has a true word ever left your lips?”
She sagged back wearily in her chair. “I’ve never lied to you. I never will.”
“The first words you said to me were a lie. Spoken in Kaelish, as I recall.”
“Spoken right before you captured me and stuffed me in a cage. Was that
the time for speaking truths?”
“I shouldn’t blame you. You can’t help yourself. It’s your nature to
dissemble.” He peered at her neck. “Your bruises are gone.”
“I removed them. Does that bother you?”
Matthias said nothing, but she saw a glimmer of shame move over his face.
Matthias had always
fought his own decency. To become a drüskelle, he’d had to kill the good
things inside him. But the boy he should have been was always there, and
she’d begun to see the truth of him in the days they’d spent together after
the shipwreck. She wanted to believe that boy was still there, locked away,
despite her betrayal and whatever he’d endured at Hellgate.
Looking at him now, she couldn’t be sure. Maybe this was the truth of him,
and the image she’d held on to this last year had been an illusion.
“I need to see to Inej,” she said, eager to have him gone.
He didn’t leave. Instead he said, “Did you think of me at all, Nina? Did I
trouble your sleep?”
She shrugged. “A Corporalnik can sleep whenever she likes.” Though she
couldn’t control her dreams.
“Sleep is a luxury at Hellgate. It’s a danger. But when I slept, I dreamed of
you.”
Her head snapped up.
“That’s right,” he said. “Every time I closed my eyes.”
“What happened in the dreams?” she asked, eager for an answer, but fearing
it, too.
“Horrible things. The worst kinds of torture. You drowned me slowly. You
burned my heart from
my chest. You blinded me.”
“I was a monster.”
“A monster, a maiden, a sylph of the ice. You kissed me, whispered stories
in my ear. You sang to me and held me as I slept. Your laugh chased me
into waking.”
“You always hated my laugh.”
“I loved your laugh, Nina. And your fierce warrior ’s heart. I might have
loved you, too.”
Might have. Once. Before she had betrayed him. Those words carved an
ache into her chest.
She knew she shouldn’t speak, but she couldn’t help herself. “And what did
you do, Matthias? What did you do to me in your dreams?”
The ship listed gently. The lanterns swayed. His eyes were blue fire.
“Everything,” he said, as he turned to go. “Everything.”
When he emerged on deck, Matthias had to head straight for the railing. All
of these canal rats and slum dwellers had easily found their sea legs, used to
hopping from boat to boat on the waterways of Ketterdam. Only the soft
one, Wylan, seemed to be struggling. He looked as poorly as Matthias felt.
It was better in the fresh air, where he could keep an eye on the horizon.
He’d managed sea voyages as a drüskelle, but he’d always felt more
comfortable on land, on the ice. It was humiliating to have these foreigners
see him vomit over the railing for the third time in as many hours.
At least Nina wasn’t here to witness that particular shame. He kept thinking
of her in that cabin, ministering to the bronze girl, all concern and kindness.
And fatigue. She’d looked so weary. It was a mistake, she’d said. To have
him branded as a slaver, tossed onto a Kerch ship, and thrown in jail?
She claimed she’d tried to set things right. But even if that were true, what
did it matter? Her kind had no honour. She’d proven that.
Someone had brewed coffee, and he saw the crew drinking it from copper
mugs with ceramic lids.
The thought to bring Nina a cup entered his head, and he crushed it. He
didn’t need to tend to her or tell Brekker that she could use relief. He
clenched his fingers, looking at the scabbed knuckles. She had seeded such
weakness in him.
Brekker gestured Matthias over to where he, Jesper, and Wylan had
gathered on the forecastle deck to examine plans of the Ice Court away
from the eyes and ears of the crew. The sight of those drawings was like a
knife to his heart. The walls, the gates, the guards. They should have
dissuaded these fools, but apparently he was as much a fool as the rest of
them.
“Why aren’t there names on anything?” Brekker asked, gesturing at the
plans.
“I don’t know Fjerdan, and we need the details right,” Wylan said. “Helvar
should do it.” He drew back when he saw Matthias’ expression. “I’m just
doing my job. Stop glaring at me.”
“No,” Matthias growled.
“Here,” Kaz said, tossing him a tiny, clear disk that winked in the sun. The
demon had propped himself on a barrel and was leaning against the mast,
his bad leg elevated on a coil of rope, that cursed walking stick resting on
his lap. Matthias liked to imagine breaking it into splinters and feeding
them to Brekker one by one.
“What is it?”
“One of Raske’s new inventions.”
Wylan’s head popped up. “I thought he did demo work.”
“He does everything,” said Jesper.
“Wedge it between your back teeth,” Kaz said as he handed the disks to the
others. “But don’t bite dow—”
Wylan started to sputter and cough, clawing at his mouth. A transparent
film had spread over his lips; it bulged like a frog’s gullet as he tried to
breathe, eyes darting left and right in panic.
Jesper started laughing, and Kaz just shook his head. “I told you not to bite
down, Wylan. Breathe through your nose.”
The boy took deep inhales, nostrils flaring.
“Easy,” said Jesper. “You’re going to make yourself pass out.”
“What is this?” asked Matthias, still holding the tiny disk in his palm.
Kaz pushed his deep into his mouth, wiggling it between his teeth. “Baleen.
I’d planned to save these, but after that ambush, I don’t know what kind of
trouble we may run into on the open sea. If you go over and can’t come up
for air, wiggle it free and bite down. It will buy you ten minutes of
breathing time. Less if you panic,” he said with a meaningful look at
Wylan. He gave the boy another piece of baleen. “Be careful with that one.”
Then he tapped the Ice Court plans.
“Names, Helvar. All of them.”
Reluctantly, Matthias picked up the pen and ink Wylan had laid out and
began to scratch in the names of the buildings and surrounding roads.
Somehow doing it himself felt even more treasonous.
Part of him wondered if he could simply find a way to separate from the
group once they got there, reveal their location, and thereby win his way
back into the good graces of his government. Would anyone at the Ice Court
even recognise him? He was probably believed to be dead, drowned in the
shipwreck that had killed his closest friends and Commander Brum. He had
no proof of his true identity. He would be a stranger who had no business in
the Ice Court, and by the time he got anyone to listen—
“You’re holding back,” Brekker said, his dark eyes trained on Matthias.
Matthias ignored the shiver that passed through him. Sometimes it was like
the demon could read minds. “I’m telling you what I know.”
“Your conscience is interfering with your memory. Remember the terms of
our deal, Helvar.”
“All right,” Matthias said, his anger rising. “You want my expertise? Your
plan won’t work.”
“You don’t even know my plan.”
“In through the prison, out through the embassy?”
“As a start.”
“It can’t be done. The prison sector is completely isolated from the rest of
the Ice Court. It isn’t connected to the embassy. There’s no way to reach it
from there.”
“It has a roof, doesn’t it?”
“You can’t get to the roof,” Matthias said with satisfaction. “The drüskelle
spend three months working with Grisha prisoners and guards as part of our
training. I’ve been in the prison, and there’s no access to the roof for exactly
that reason – if someone manages to get out of his cell, we don’t want him
running around the Ice Court. The prison is totally sealed off from the other
two sectors in the outer circle. Once you’re in, you’re in.”
“There’s always a way out.” Kaz pulled the prison plan from the stack.
“Five floors, right?
Processing area, and four levels of cells. So what’s here? In the basement?”
“Nothing. A laundry and the incinerator.”
“The incinerator.”
“Yes, where they burn the convicts’ clothes when they arrive. It’s a plague
precaution but—” As soon as the words left Matthias’ mouth he understood
what Brekker had in mind. “Sweet Djel, you want us to climb six storeys up
an incinerator shaft?”
“When does the incinerator run?”
“If I remember right, early morning, but even without the heat, we—”
“He doesn’t mean for us to climb it,” said Nina, emerging from
belowdecks.
Kaz sat up straighter. “Who’s watching Inej?”
“Rotty,” she said. “I’ll go back in a minute. I just needed some air. And
don’t feign concern for Inej when you’re planning to send her climbing up
six storeys of chimney with only a rope and a prayer.”
“The Wraith can manage it.”
“The Wraith is a sixteen-year-old girl currently lying unconscious on a
table. She may not even survive the night.”
“She will,” said Kaz, and something savage flashed in his eyes. Matthias
suspected that Brekker would drag the girl back from hell himself if he had
to.
Jesper picked up his rifle, running a soft cloth over it. “Why are we talking
about scaling chimneys when we’ve got a bigger problem?”
“And what’s that?” Kaz asked, though Matthias had the distinct impression
he knew.
“We have no business going after Bo Yul-Bayur if Pekka Rollins is
involved.”
“Who is Pekka Rollins?” Matthias asked, turning the ridiculous syllables
over in his mouth. Kerch names had no dignity to them. He knew that the
man was a gang leader and that he lined his pockets with proceeds from the
Hellshow. That was bad enough, but Matthias sensed there was more.
Wylan shuddered, pulling at the gummy substance on his lips. “Only the
biggest, baddest operator in all of Ketterdam. He has money we don’t have,
connections we don’t have, and probably a head start.”
Jesper nodded. “For once, Wylan is making sense. If by some miracle we
do manage to spring Bo
Yul-Bayur before Rollins does, once he finds out we’re the ones who beat
him to it, we’re all dead men.”
“Pekka Rollins is a Barrel boss,” Kaz said. “No more, no less. Stop making
him out to be some kind of immortal.”
There’s something else going on here, thought Matthias. Brekker had lost
the thrum of violence that seemed to drive him earlier, when he’d murdered
Oomen. But there was still a lingering intensity in his words. Matthias felt
sure that Kaz Brekker hated Pekka Rollins, and it wasn’t just because he’d
blown up their ship and hired thugs to shoot at them. This had the feel of
old wounds and bad blood.
Jesper leaned back and said, “You think Per Haskell is going to back you
when he finds out you crossed Pekka Rollins? You think the old man wants
that war?”
Kaz shook his head, and Matthias saw real frustration there. “Pekka Rollins
didn’t come into this world dressed in velvet and rolling in kruge. You’re
still thinking small. The way Per Haskell does, the way men like Rollins
want you to. We pull off this job and divvy up that haul, we’ll be the
legends of the Barrel. We’ll be the crew that beat Pekka Rollins.”
“Maybe we should forget approaching from the north,” said Wylan. “If
Pekka’s crew has a head start, we should head straight to Djerholm.”
“The harbour will be crawling with security,” Kaz said. “Not to mention all
the usual customs agents and lawmen.”
“The south? Through Ravka?”
“That border is locked down tight,” Nina said.
“It’s a big border,” said Matthias.
“But there’s no way to know where it’s most vulnerable,” she replied.
“Unless you have some magical knowledge about which watchtowers and
outposts are active. Besides, if we enter from Ravka, we have to contend
with Ravkans and Fjerdans.”
What she said made sense, but it unnerved him. In Fjerda women didn’t talk
this way, didn’t speak of military or strategic matters. But Nina had always
been like that.
“We enter from the north as planned,” Kaz said.
Jesper knocked his head against the hull and cast his eyes heavenward.
“Fine. But if Pekka Rollins kills us all, I’m going to get Wylan’s ghost to
teach my ghost how to play the flute just so that I can annoy the hell out of
your ghost.”
Brekker ’s lips quirked. “I’ll just hire Matthias’ ghost to kick your ghost’s
ass.”
“My ghost won’t associate with your ghost,” Matthias said primly, and then
wondered if the sea air was rotting his brain.
PART 3
HEARTSICK
Everything hurt. And why was the room moving?
Inej came awake slowly, her thoughts jumbled. She remembered the thrust
of Oomen’s knife, climbing the crates, people shouting as she dangled from
the tips of her fingers. Come on down, Wraith. But Kaz had returned for her,
to rescue his investment. They must have made it onto the Ferolind.
She tried to roll over, but the pain was too intense, so she settled for turning
her head. Nina was drowsing on a stool tucked into the corner by the table,
Inej’s hand grasped loosely in her own.
“Nina,” she croaked. Her throat felt like it was coated in wool.
Nina jolted awake. “I’m up!” she blurted, then peered blearily at Inej.
“You’re awake.” She sat up straighter. “Oh, Saints, you’re awake!”
And then Nina burst out crying.
Inej tried to sit up, but could barely lift her head.
“No, no,” Nina said. “Don’t try to move, just rest.”
“Are you okay?”
Nina started to laugh through her tears. “I’m fine. You’re the one who got
stabbed. I don’t know what’s wrong with me. It’s just so much easier to kill
people than take care of them.” Inej blinked, and then they both started
laughing. “Owwww,” groaned Inej. “Don’t make me laugh. That feels
awful.”
Nina winced. “How do you feel?”
“Sore, but not terrible. Thirsty.”
Nina offered her a tin cup full of cold water. “It’s fresh. We had rain
yesterday.”
Inej sipped carefully, letting Nina hold her head up. “How long was I out?”
“Three days, almost four. Jesper is driving us all crazy. I don’t think I’ve
seen him sit still for more than two minutes together.” She stood up
abruptly. “I need to tell Kaz you’re awake! We thought
—”
“Wait,” Inej said, grabbing for Nina’s hand. “Just … can we not tell him
right away?”
Nina sat back down, her face puzzled. “Sure, but—”
“Just for tonight.” She paused. “Is it night?”
“Yes. Just past midnight, actually.”
“Do we know who came after us at the harbour?”
“Pekka Rollins. He hired the Black Tips and the Razorgulls to keep us from
getting out of Fifth Harbour.”
“How did he know where we were leaving from?”
“We’re not sure yet.”
“I saw Oomen—”
“Oomen’s dead. Kaz killed him.”
“He did?”
“Kaz killed a lot of people. Rotty saw him go after the Black Tips who had
you up on the crates. I believe his exact words were, ‘There was enough
blood to paint a barn red.’”
Inej closed her eyes. “So much death.” They were surrounded by it in the
Barrel. But this was the closest it had ever come to her.
“He was afraid for you.”
“Kaz isn’t afraid of anything.”
“You should have seen his face when he brought you to me.”
“I’m a very valuable investment.”
Nina’s jaw dropped. “Tell me he didn’t say that.”
“Of course he did. Well, not the valuable part.”
“Idiot.”
“How’s Matthias?”
“Also an idiot. Do you think you can eat?”
Inej shook her head. She didn’t feel hungry at all.
“Try,” urged Nina. “There wasn’t much of you to begin with.”
“I just want to rest for now.”
“Of course,” Nina said. “I’ll turn down the lantern.”
Inej reached for her again. “Don’t. I don’t want to go back to sleep yet.”
“I could read to you if I had anything to read. There’s a Heartrender at the
Little Palace who can recite epic poetry for hours. Then you’d wish you had
died.”
Inej laughed then winced. “Just stay.”
“All right,” said Nina. “Since you want to talk. Tell me why you don’t have
the cup and crow on your arm.”
“Starting with the easy questions?”
Nina crossed her legs and planted her chin in her hands. “Waiting.”
Inej was quiet for a while. “You saw my scars.” Nina nodded. “When Kaz
got Per Haskell to pay
off my indenture with the Menagerie, the first thing I did was have the
peacock feather tattoo removed.”
“Whoever took care of it did a pretty rough job.”
“He wasn’t a Corporalnik or even a medik.” Just one of the halfknowledgeable butchers who plied their trade among the desperate of the
Barrel. He’d offered her a slug of whisky, then simply hacked away at the
skin, leaving a puckered spill of wounds down her forearm. She hadn’t
cared. The pain was liberation. They had loved to talk about her skin at the
House of Exotics. It was like coffee with sweet milk. It was like burnished
caramel. It was like satin. She welcomed every cut of the knife and the
scars it left behind. “Kaz told me I didn’t have to do anything but make
myself useful.”
Kaz had taught her to crack a safe, pick a pocket, wield a knife. He’d gifted
her with her first blade, the one she called Sankt Petyr – not as pretty as
wild geraniums, but more practical, she supposed.
Maybe I’ll use it on you, she’d said.
He’d sighed. If only you were that bloodthirsty. She hadn’t been able to tell
if he was kidding.
Now she shifted slightly on the table. There was pain, but it wasn’t too bad.
Given how deep the knife had gone, her Saints must have been guiding
Nina’s hand.
“Kaz said if I proved myself I could join the Dregs when I was ready. And I
did. But I didn’t take the tattoo.”
Nina’s brows rose. “I didn’t think it was optional.”
“Technically it isn’t. I know some people don’t understand, but Kaz told me
… he said it was my choice, that he wouldn’t be the one to mark me again.”
But he had, in his own way – despite her best intentions. Feeling anything
for Kaz Brekker was the worst kind of foolishness. She knew that. But he’d
been the one to rescue her, to see her potential.
He’d bet on her, and that meant something – even if he’d done it for his
own selfish reasons. He’d even dubbed her the Wraith.
I don’t like it, she’d said. It makes me sound like a corpse.
A phantom, he corrected.
Didn’t you say I was to be your spider? Why not stick with that?
Because there are plenty of spiders in the Barrel. Besides, you want your
enemies to be afraid. Not think they can squash you with the toe of one
boot.
My enemies?
Our enemies.
He’d helped her build a legend to wear as armour, something bigger and
more frightening than the girl she’d been. Inej sighed. She didn’t want to
think about Kaz any more.
“Talk,” she said to Nina.
“Your eyelids are drooping. You should sleep.”
“Don’t like boats. Bad memories.”
“Me too.”
“Sing something, then.”
Nina laughed. “Remember what I said about wishing you were dead? You
do not want me to sing.”
“Please?”
“I only know Ravkan folk tunes and Kerch drinking songs.”
“Drinking song. Something rowdy, please.”
Nina snorted. “Only for you, Wraith.” She cleared her throat and began.
“Mighty young captain, bold on the sea. Soldier and sailor and free of
disease—”
Inej started to giggle and clutched her side. “You’re right. You couldn’t
carry a tune in a bucket.”
“I told you that.”
“Go on.”
Nina’s voice really was terrible. But it helped to keep Inej on this boat, in
this moment. She didn’t want to think about the last time she’d been at sea,
but the memories were hard to fight.
She wasn’t even supposed to be in the wagon the morning the slavers took
her. She’d been fourteen, and her family had been summering on the coast
of West Ravka, enjoying the seaside and performing in a carnival on the
outskirts of Os Kervo. She should have been helping her father mend the
nets. But she’d been feeling lazy, and she’d allowed herself another few
minutes to sleep in, drowsing beneath the thin cotton covers and listening to
the rush and sigh of the waves.
When a man had appeared silhouetted in the door to the caravan, she hadn’t
even known to run.
She’d simply said, “Five more minutes, Papa.”
Then they had her by the legs and were dragging her out of the wagon. She
banged her head hard on the ground. There were four of them, big men,
seafarers. When she tried to scream, they gagged her. They bound her hands
and wrists, and one of them threw her over his shoulder as they plunged
into a longboat they’d moored in the cove.
Later, Inej learned that the coast was a popular location for slavers. They’d
spotted the Suli caravan from their ship and rowed in after dawn when the
camp was all but deserted.
The rest of the journey was a blur. She was thrown into a cargo hold with a
group of other children – some older, some younger, mostly girls but a few
boys, too. She was the only Suli, but a few spoke Ravkan, and they told
their own stories of being taken. One had been snatched from his father ’s
shipyard; another had been playing in the tidepools and had strayed too far
from her friends.
One had been sold by her older brother to pay off his gambling debts. The
sailors spoke a language she didn’t know, but one of the other children
claimed they were being taken to the largest of Kerch’s outer islands, where
they would be auctioned to private owners or pleasure houses in Ketterdam
and Novyi Zem. People came from all over the world to bid. Inej had
thought slaving was illegal in Kerch, but apparently it still happened.
She never saw the auction block. When they’d finally dropped anchor, Inej
was led on deck and handed over to one of the most beautiful women she’d
ever seen, a tall blonde with hazel eyes and piles of golden hair.
The woman had held her lantern up and examined every inch of Inej – her
teeth, her breasts, even her feet. She’d tugged on the matted hair on Inej’s
head. “This will have to be shaved.” Then she’d stepped back. “Pretty,” she
said. “Scrawny and flat as a pan, but her skin is flawless.”
She’d turned away to barter with the sailors as Inej stood there, clutching
her bound hands over her chest, her blouse still open, her skirt still hiked
around her waist. Inej could see the glint of moonlight off the waves of the
cove. Jump, she’d thought. Whatever waits at the bottom of the sea is better
than where this woman is taking you. But she hadn’t had the courage.
The girl she’d become would have jumped without a second thought, and
maybe taken one of the
slavers down with her. Or maybe she was kidding herself. She’d frozen
when Tante Heleen had accosted her in West Stave. She’d been no stronger,
no braver, just the same frightened Suli girl who’d been paralysed and
humiliated on the deck of that ship.
Nina was still singing, something about a sailor who’d abandoned his
sweetheart.
“Teach me the chorus,” Inej said.
“You should rest.”
“Chorus.”
So Nina taught her the words, and they sang together, fumbling through the
verses, hopelessly out of key, until the lanterns burned low.
Jesper felt about ready to hurl himself overboard just for a change in
routine. Six more days. Six more days on this boat – if they were lucky and
the wind was good – and then they should make land.
Fjerda’s western coast was all perilous rock and steep cliffs. It could only be
safely approached at Djerholm and Elling, and since security at both
harbours was tight, they’d been forced to travel all the way to the northern
whaling ports. He was secretly hoping they’d be attacked by pirates, but the
little ship was too small to be carrying valuable cargo. They were an
unworthy target and they passed unmolested through the busiest trade
routes of the True Sea, flying neutral Kerch colours. Soon, they were in the
cold waters of the north, moving into the Isenvee.
Jesper prowled the deck, climbed the rigging, tried to get the crew to play
cards with him, cleaned his guns. He missed land and good food and better
lager. He missed the city. If he’d wanted wide open spaces and silence, he
would have stayed on the frontier and become the farmer his father had
hoped for. There was little to do on the ship but study the layout of the Ice
Court, listen to Matthias grumbling, and annoy Wylan, who could always
be found labouring over his attempts to reconstruct the possible
mechanisms of the ringwall gates.
Kaz had been impressed with the sketches.
“You think like a lockpick,” he’d told Wylan.
“I do not.”
“I mean you can see space along three axes.”
“I’m not a criminal,” Wylan protested.
Kaz had cast him an almost pitying look. “No, you’re a flautist who fell in
with bad company.”
Jesper sat down next to Wylan. “Just learn to take a compliment. Kaz
doesn’t hand them out often.”
“It’s not a compliment. I’m nothing like him. I don’t belong here.”
“No arguments from me.”
“And you don’t belong here, either.”
“I beg your pardon, merchling?”
“We don’t need a sharpshooter for Kaz’s plan, so what’s your job – other
than stalking around making everyone antsy?”
He shrugged. “Kaz trusts me.”
Wylan snorted and picked up his pen. “Sure about that?”
Jesper shifted uncomfortably. Of course he wasn’t sure about it. He spent
far too much of his time guessing at Kaz Brekker ’s thoughts. And if he had
earned some small part of Kaz’s trust, did he
deserve it?
He tapped his thumbs against his revolvers and said, “When the bullets start
flying, you may find I’m nice to have around. Those pretty pictures aren’t
going to keep you alive.”
“We need these plans. And in case you’ve forgotten, one of my flash bombs
helped get us out of the Ketterdam harbour.”
Jesper blew out a breath. “Brilliant strategy.”
“It worked, didn’t it?”
“You blinded our guys right along with the Black Tips.”
“It was a calculated risk.”
“It was cross-your-fingers-and-hope-for-the-best. Believe me, I know the
difference.”
“So I’ve heard.”
“Meaning?”
“Meaning everyone knows you can’t keep away from a fight or a wager, no
matter the odds.”
Jesper squinted up at the sails. “If you aren’t born with every advantage,
you learn to take your chances.”
“I wasn’t—” Wylan left off and set down his pen. “Why do you think you
know everything about
me?”
“I know plenty, merchling.”
“How nice for you. I feel like I’ll never know enough.”
“About what?”
“About anything,” Wylan muttered.
Against his better judgement, Jesper was intrigued. “Like what?” he
pressed.
“Well, like those guns,” he said gesturing to Jesper ’s revolvers. “They have
an unusual firing mechanism, don’t they? If I could take them apart—”
“Don’t even think about it.”
Wylan shrugged. “Or what about the ice moat?” he said, tapping the plan of
the Ice Court. Matthias had said the moat wasn’t solid, only a slick, waferthin layer of ice over frigid water, thoroughly exposed and impossible to
cross.
“What about it?”
“Where does all the water come from? The Court is on a hill, so where’s the
aquifer or aqueduct to bring the water up?”
“Does it matter? There’s a bridge. We don’t need to cross the ice moat.”
“But aren’t you curious?”
“Saints, no. Get me a system for winning at Three Man Bramble or Makker
’s Wheel. That I’m curious about.”
Wylan had turned back to his work, his disappointment obvious.
For some reason, Jesper felt a little disappointed, too.
Jesper checked on Inej every morning and every night. The idea that the
ambush on the docks might simply be the end of her had shaken him.
Despite Nina’s efforts, he’d been fairly sure the Wraith wasn’t long for this
world.
But one morning, Jesper arrived to find Inej sitting up, clothed in breeches,
quilted vest, and hooded tunic.
Nina was bent over, struggling to get the Suli girl’s feet into her strange
rubber-soled slippers.
“Inej!” Jesper crowed. “You’re not dead!”
She smiled faintly. “No more than anyone.”
“If you’re spouting depressing Suli wisdom, then you must be feeling
better.”
“Don’t just stand there,” Nina groused. “Help me get these things on her
feet.”
“If you would just let me—” Inej began.
“Do not bend,” Nina snapped. “Do not leap. Do not move abruptly. If you
don’t promise to take it easy, I’ll slow your heart and keep you in a coma
until I can be sure you’ve recovered fully.”
“Nina Zenik, as soon as I figure out where you’ve put my knives, we’re
going to have words.”
“The first ones had better be ‘ Thank you, oh great Nina, for dedicating
every waking moment of this miserable journey to saving my sorry life. ’”
Jesper expected Inej to laugh and was startled when she took Nina’s face
between her hands and said, “Thank you for keeping me in this world when
fate seemed determined to drag me to the next. I owe you a life debt.”
Nina blushed deeply. “I was teasing, Inej.” She paused. “I think we’ve both
had enough of debts.”
“This is one I’m glad to bear.”
“Okay, okay. When we’re back in Ketterdam, take me out for waffles.”
Now Inej did laugh. She dropped her hands and appeared to speculate.
“Dessert for a life? I’m not sure that seems equitable.”
“I expect really good waffles.”
“I know just the place,” said Jesper. “They have this apple syrup—”
“You’re not invited,” Nina said. “Now come help me get her standing.”
“I can stand on my own,” Inej grumbled as she slid off the table and rose to
her feet.
“Humour me.”
With a sigh, Inej gripped the arm that Jesper offered, and they made their
way out of the cabin and up to the deck, Nina trailing behind them.
“This is foolishness,” Inej said. “I’m fine.”
“You are,” replied Jesper, “but I may keel over at any moment, so pay
attention.”
Once they were on deck, Inej squeezed his arm to get him to halt. She tilted
her head back, breathing deeply. It was a stone grey day, the sea a bleak
slate broken up by whitecaps, the sky pleated with thick ripples of cloud. A
hard wind filled the sails, carrying the little boat over the waves.
“It feels good to be this kind of cold,” she murmured.
“This kind?”
“Wind in your hair, sea spray on your skin. The cold of the living.”
“Two turns around the deck,” Nina warned. “Then back to bed.” She went
to join Wylan at the stern. It didn’t escape Jesper that she’d moved to the
point on the ship furthest from Matthias.
“Have they been like that the whole time?” Inej asked, looking between
Nina and the Fjerdan.
Jesper nodded. “It’s like watching two bobcats circle each other.”
Inej made a little humming noise. “But what do they mean to do when they
pounce?”
“Claw each other to death?”
Inej rolled her eyes. “No wonder you do so badly at the tables.”
Jesper steered her towards the rail, where they could make an
approximation of a promenade without getting in anyone’s way. “I’d
threaten to toss you into the drink, but Kaz is watching.”
Inej nodded. She didn’t look up to where Kaz stood beside Specht at the
wheel. But Jesper did and gave him a cheery wave. Kaz’s expression didn’t
change.
“Would it kill him to smile every once in a while?” Jesper asked.
“Very possibly.”
Every crew member called greetings and well wishes, and Jesper could
sense Inej perking up with every cheer of “The Wraith returns!” Even
Matthias gave her an awkward bow and said, “I understand you’re the
reason we made it out of the harbour alive.”
“I suspect there were a lot of reasons,” said Inej.
“I’m a reason,” Jesper offered helpfully.
“All the same,” said Matthias, ignoring him. “Thank you.”
They moved on, and Jesper saw a pleased grin playing over Inej’s lips.
“Surprised?” he asked.
“A bit,” she admitted. “I spend so much time with Kaz. I guess—”
“It’s a novelty to feel appreciated.”
She released a little chuckle and pressed a hand to her side. “Still hurts to
laugh.”
“They’re glad you’re alive. I’m glad.”
“I should hope so. I think I just never quite felt like I fit in with the Dregs.”
“Well, you don’t.”
“Thanks.”
“We’re a crew with limited interests, and you don’t gamble, swear, or drink
to excess. But here’s the secret to popularity: risk death to save your
compatriots from being blown to bits in an ambush.
Great way to make friends.”
“As long as I don’t have to start going to parties.”
When they reached the foredeck, Inej leaned on the railing and looked out
at the horizon. “Did he come to see me at all?”
Jesper knew she meant Kaz. “Every day.”
Inej turned her dark eyes on him, then shook her head. “You can’t read
people, and you can’t bluff.”
Jesper sighed. He hated disappointing anyone. “No,” he admitted.
She nodded and looked back at the ocean.
“I don’t think he likes sickbeds,” Jesper said.
“Who does?”
“I mean, I think it was hard for him to be around you that way. That first
day when you were hurt
… he went a little crazy.” It cost Jesper something to admit that. Would Kaz
have gone off on that kind of a mad-dog tear if it had been Jesper with a
knife stuck in his side?
“Of course he did. This is a six-person job, and apparently he needs me to
scale an incinerator shaft. If I die, the plan falls apart.”
Jesper didn’t argue. He couldn’t pretend to understand Kaz or what drove
him. “Tell me something. What was the big falling out between Wylan and
his father?”
Inej cast a quick glance up at Kaz, then looked over her shoulder to make
sure none of the crew was lurking nearby. Kaz had been clear that
information even remotely related to the job must be kept among the six of
them. “I don’t know exactly,” she said. “Three months ago Wylan turned up
at a flophouse near the Slat. He was using a different surname, but Kaz
keeps tabs on everyone new to the Barrel, so he had me do some snooping.”
“And?”
Inej shrugged. “The servants at the Van Eck house are paid well enough that
they’re hard to bribe.
The information I got didn’t add up to much. There were rumours Wylan
had been caught in a sweaty romp with one of his tutors.”
“Really?” said Jesper incredulously. Hidden depths indeed.
“Just a rumour. And it’s not as if Wylan left home to take up residence with
a lover.”
“So why did Papa Van Eck kick him out?”
“I don’t think he did. Van Eck writes to Wylan every week, and Wylan
doesn’t even open the letters.”
“What do they say?”
Inej leaned back carefully on the railing. “You’re assuming I read them.”
“You didn’t?”
“Of course I did.” Then she frowned, remembering. “They just said the
same thing again and again: If you’re reading this, then you know how much
I wish to have you home. Or I pray that you read these words and think of
all you’ve left behind. ”
Jesper looked over to where Wylan was chatting with Nina. “The
mysterious merchling. I wonder
what Van Eck did that was bad enough to send Wylan to slum it with us.”
“Now you tell me something, Jesper. What brought you on this mission?
You know how risky this job is, what the chances are that we’ll come back.
I know you love a challenge, but this is a stretch, even for you.”
Jesper looked at the grey swells of the sea, marching to the horizon in
endless formation. He’d never liked the ocean, the sense of the unknown
beneath his feet, that something hungry and full of teeth might be waiting to
drag him under. And that was how he felt every day now, even on land.
“I’m in debt, Inej.”
“You’re always in debt.”
“No. It’s bad this time. I borrowed money from the wrong people. You
know my father has a farm?”
“In Novyi Zem.”
“Yes, in the west. It just started turning a profit this year.”
“Oh, Jesper, you didn’t.”
“I needed the loan…. I told him it’s so I can finish my degree at the
university.”
She stared at him. “He thinks you’re a student?”
“That’s why I came to Ketterdam. My first week in the city I went down to
East Stave with some other students. I put a few kruge on the table. It was a
whim. I didn’t even know the rules of Makker ’s Wheel. But when the
dealer gave the wheel a spin, I’d never heard a more beautiful sound. I won,
and I kept winning. It was the best night of my life.”
“And you’ve been chasing it ever since.”
He nodded. “I should have stayed in the library. I won. I lost. I lost some
more. I needed money so I started taking on work with the gangs. Two guys
jumped me in an alley one night. Kaz took them down, and we started
doing jobs together.”
“He probably hired those boys to attack you so you’d feel indebted to him.”
“He wouldn’t—” Jesper stopped short, and then he laughed. “Of course he
would.” Jesper flexed
his knuckles, concentrated on the lines of his palms. “Kaz is … I don’t
know, he’s like nobody else I’ve ever known. He surprises me.”
“Yes. Like a hive of bees in your dresser drawer.”
Jesper barked a laugh. “Just like that.”
“So what are we doing here?”
Jesper turned back to the sea, feeling his cheeks heat. “Hoping for honey, I
guess. And praying not to get stung.”
Inej bumped her shoulder against his. “Then at least we’re both the same
kind of stupid.”
“I don’t know what your excuse is, Wraith. I’m the one who can never walk
away from a bad hand.”
She looped her arm in his. “That makes you a rotten gambler, Jesper. But an
excellent friend.”
“You’re too good for him, you know.”
“I know. So are you.”
“Shall we walk?”
“Yes,” Inej said, falling into step beside him. “And then I need you to
distract Nina, so I can go search for my knives.”
“No problem. I’ll just bring up Helvar.” Jesper glanced back at the wheel as
they set off down the opposite side of the deck. Kaz hadn’t moved. He was
still watching them, his eyes hard, his face as unreadable as ever.
It took two days after she emerged from the surgeon’s cabin for Kaz to
make himself approach Inej.
She was sitting by herself, legs crossed, back to the hull of the ship, sipping
a cup of tea.
Kaz limped over to her. “I want to show you something.”
“I’m well, thank you for asking,” she said, looking up at him. “How are
you?”
He felt his lips twist. “Splendid.” Awkwardly, he lowered himself down
beside her and set aside his cane.
“Is your leg bad?”
“It’s fine. Here.” He spread Wylan’s drawing of the prison sector between
them. Most of Wylan’s plans showed the Ice Court from above, but the
prison elevation was a side view, a cross-section showing the building’s
floors stacked on top of one another.
“I’ve seen it,” Inej said. She ran her finger from the basement up to the roof
in a straight line. “Six storeys up a chimney.”
“Can you do it?”
Her dark brows rose. “Is there another option?”
“No.”
“So if I say I can’t make that climb, will you tell Specht to turn the boat
around and take us back to Ketterdam?”
“I’ll find another option,” said Kaz. “I don’t know what, but I’m not giving
up that haul.”
“You know I can do it, Kaz, and you know I’m not going to refuse. So why
ask?”
Because I’ve been looking for an excuse to talk to you for two days.
“I want to make sure you know what you’ll be dealing with and that you’re
studying the plans.”
“Will there be a test?”
“Yes,” said Kaz. “If you fail, we’ll all end up stuck inside a Fjerdan prison.”
“Mmm,” she said and took a sip of her tea. “And I’ll end up dead.” She
closed her eyes and leaned her head back against the hull. “I’m worried
about the escape route to the harbour. I don’t like that there’s only one way
out.”
Kaz settled back against the hull, too. “Me neither,” he conceded, stretching
out his bad leg. “But that’s why the Fjerdans built it that way.”
“Do you trust Specht?”
Kaz cast her a sideways glance. “Is there a reason I shouldn’t?”
“Not at all, but if the Ferolind isn’t waiting for us in the harbour …”
“I trust him enough.”
“He owes you?”
Kaz nodded. He glanced around then said, “The navy threw him out for
insubordination, and refused him his pension. He has a sister to support
near Belendt. I got him his money.”
“That was good of you.”
Kaz narrowed his eyes. “I’m not some character out of a children’s story
who plays harmless pranks and steals from the rich to give to the poor.
There was money to be made and information to be had. Specht knows the
navy’s routes like the back of his hand.”
“Never something for nothing, Kaz,” she said, her gaze steady. “I know.
Still, if the Ferolind is intercepted, we’ll have no way out of Djerholm.”
“I’ll get us out. You know that.”
Tell me you know that. He needed her to say it. This job wasn’t like
anything he’d attempted before.
Every doubt she’d raised was a legitimate one, and only echoed the fears in
his own head. He’d snapped at her before they’d left Ketterdam, told her
he’d get a new spider for the job if she didn’t think he could pull it off. He
needed to know that she believed he could do this, that he could take them
into the Ice Court and bring them out feeling whole and righteous the way
he’d done with other crews on other jobs. He needed to know she believed
in him.
But all she said was, “I hear Pekka Rollins was the one gunning for us in
the harbour.”
Kaz felt a surge of disappointment. “So?”
“Don’t think I haven’t noticed the way you go after him, Kaz.”
“He’s just another boss, one more Barrel thug.”
“No, he isn’t. When you go after the other gangs, it’s business. But with
Pekka Rollins it’s personal.”
Later, he wasn’t sure why he said it. He’d never told anyone, never spoken
the words aloud. But now Kaz kept his eyes on the sails above them and
said, “Pekka Rollins killed my brother.”
He didn’t have to see Inej’s face to sense her shock. “You had a brother?”
“I had a lot of things,” he muttered.
“I’m sorry.”
Had he wanted her sympathy? Was that why he’d told her?
“Kaz—” She hesitated. What would she do now? Try to lay a comforting
hand on his arm? Tell him she understood?
“I’ll pray for him,” Inej said. “For peace in the next world if not in this
one.”
He turned his head. They were sitting close together, their shoulders nearly
touching. Her eyes were so brown they were almost black, and for once her
hair was down. She always wore it tied back in a ruthlessly tight coil. Even
the idea of being this near someone should have set his skin crawling.
Instead he thought, What happens if I move closer?
“I don’t want your prayers,” he said.
“What do you want, then?”
The old answers came easily to mind. Money. Vengeance. Jordie’s voice in
my head silenced forever. But a different reply roared to life inside him,
loud, insistent, and unwelcome. You, Inej. You.
He shrugged and turned away. “To die buried under the weight of my own
gold.”
Inej sighed. “Then I’ll pray you get all you ask for.”
“More prayers,” he asked. “And what do you want, Wraith?” he asked.
“To turn my back on Ketterdam and never hear that name again.”
Good. He’d need to find a new spider, but he’d be rid of this distraction.
“Your share of thirty million kruge can grant that wish.” He pushed to his
feet. “So save your prayers for good weather and stupid guards. Just leave
me out of it.”
Kaz limped to the bow, annoyed with himself and angry with Inej. Why had
he sought her out? Why had he told her about Jordie? He’d been irritable
and unfocused for days. He was used to having his Wraith around – feeding
the crows outside his window, sharpening her knives while he worked at his
desk, chastising him with her Suli proverbs. He didn’t want Inej. He just
wanted their routine back.
Kaz leaned against the ship’s railing. He wished he hadn’t said anything
about his brother. Even those few words raised the memories, clamouring
for attention. What had he said to Geels at the Exchange? I’m the kind of
bastard they only manufacture in the Barrel. One more lie, one more piece
of the myth he’d built for himself.
After their father died, crushed beneath a plough with his insides strewn
across a field like a trail of damp red blossoms, Jordie had sold the farm.
Not for much. The debts and liens had seen to that.
But it was enough to see them safe to Ketterdam and to keep them in
modest comfort for a good while.
Kaz had been nine, still missing Da and frightened of travelling from the
only home he’d ever known. He’d held tight to his big brother ’s hand as
they journeyed through miles of sweet, rolling countryside, until they
reached one of the major waterways and hopped a bogboat that carried
produce to Ketterdam.
“What will happen when we get there?” he’d asked Jordie.
“I’ll get a job as a runner at the Exchange, then a clerk. I’ll become a
stockholder and then a proper merchant, and then I’ll make my fortune.”
“What about me?”
“You will go to school.”
“Why won’t you go to school?”
Jordie had scoffed. “I’m too old for school. Too smart, too.”
The first few days in the city were all Jordie had promised. They’d walked
along the great curve of the harbours known as the Lid, then down East
Stave to see all the gambling palaces. They didn’t venture too far south,
where they’d been warned the streets grew dangerous. They let rooms in a
tidy little boarding house not far from the Exchange and tried every new
food they saw, stuffing themselves sick on quince candy. Kaz liked the little
omelette stands where you could choose what you liked to put in them.
Each morning, Jordie went to the Exchange to look for work and told Kaz
to stay in his room.
Ketterdam wasn’t safe for children on their own. There were thieves and
pickpockets and even men who would snap up little boys and sell them to
the highest bidder. So Kaz stayed inside. He pushed a chair up to the basin
and climbed on it so he could see himself in the mirror as he tried to make
coins disappear, just as he’d seen a magician do, performing in front of one
of the gambling halls. Kaz could have watched him for hours, but
eventually Jordie had dragged him away. The card tricks had been good, but
the disappearing coin kept him up at night. How had the magician done it?
It had been there one moment, gone the next.
The disaster began with a wind-up dog.
Jordie had come home hungry and irritable, frustrated after another wasted
day. “They say they have no jobs, but they mean they have no jobs for a
boy like me. Everyone there is someone’s cousin or brother or best friend’s
son.”
Kaz hadn’t been in a mood to try to cheer him up. He was grouchy after so
many hours indoors
with nothing but coins and cards to keep him company. He wanted to go
down to East Stave to find the magician.
In the years after, Kaz would always wonder what might have happened if
Jordie hadn’t indulged him, if they’d gone to the harbour to look at boats
instead, or if they’d simply been walking on the other side of the canal. He
wanted to believe that might have made the difference, but the older he got,
the more he doubted it would have mattered at all.
They’d passed the green riot of the Emerald Palace, and right next door, in
front of the Gold Strike, there’d been a boy selling little mechanical dogs.
The toys wound up with a bronze key and waddled on stiff legs, tin ears
flapping. Kaz had crouched down, turning all the keys, trying to get all the
dogs waddling at the same time, and the boy selling them had struck up a
conversation with Jordie.
As it turned out, he was from Lij, not two towns over from where Kaz and
Jordie had been raised, and he knew a man with jobs open for runners – not
at the Exchange, but at an office just down the street.
Jordie should come by the next morning, he said, and they could go chat
with him together. He’d been hoping to land a job as a runner, too.
On the way home, Jordie had bought them each a hot chocolate, not just
one to share.
“Our luck is changing,” he’d said as they curled their hands around the
steaming cups, feet dangling over a little bridge, the lights of the Stave
playing over the water. Kaz had looked down at their reflections on the
bright surface of the canal and thought, I feel lucky now.
The boy who sold the mechanical dogs was named Filip and the man he
knew was Jakob Hertzoon,
a minor mercher who owned a small coffeehouse near the Exchange, where
he arranged for low-level investors to split stakes in trade voyages passing
through Kerch.
“You should see this place,” Jordie had crowed to Kaz upon arriving home
late that night. “There are people there at every hour, talking and trading
news, buying and selling shares and futures, ordinary people – butchers and
bakers and dockworkers. Mister Hertzoon says any man can become rich.
All he needs is luck and the right friends.”
The next week was like a happy dream. Jordie and Filip worked for Mister
Hertzoon as runners,
carrying messages to and from the dock and occasionally placing orders for
him at the Exchange or other trading offices. While they were working, Kaz
was allowed to stay at the coffeehouse. The man who filled drink orders
from behind the bar would let him sit up on the counter and practise his
magic tricks, and gave Kaz all the hot chocolate he could drink.
They were invited to the Hertzoon home for dinner, a grand house on the
Zelverstraat with a blue front door and white lace curtains in the windows.
Mister Hertzoon was a big man with a ruddy, friendly face and tufty grey
sideburns. His wife, Margit, pinched Kaz’s cheeks and fed him hutspot
made with smoked sausage, and he’d played in the kitchen with their
daughter, Saskia. She was ten years old, and Kaz thought she was the most
beautiful girl he’d ever seen. He and Jordie stayed late into the night
singing songs while Margit played the piano, their big silver dog thumping
its tail in hapless rhythm. It was the best Kaz had felt since his father died.
Mister Hertzoon even let Jordie put tiny sums down on company stocks.
Jordie wanted to invest more, but Mister Hertzoon always advised caution.
“Small steps, lad. Small steps.”
Things got even better when Mister Hertzoon’s friend returned from Novyi
Zem. He was the captain of a Kerch trader, and it seemed he had crossed
paths with a sugar farmer in a Zemeni port.
The farmer had been in his cups, moaning about how his and his
neighbours’ cane fields had been flooded. Right now sugar prices were low,
but when people found out how hard it would be to get sugar in the coming
months, prices would soar. Mister Hertzoon’s friend intended to buy up all
the sugar he could before the news reached Ketterdam.
“That seems like cheating,” Kaz had whispered to Jordie.
“It isn’t cheating,” Jordie had snorted. “It’s just good business. And how are
ordinary people supposed to move up in the world without a little extra
help?”
Mister Hertzoon had Jordie and Filip place the orders with three separate
offices to make sure such a large purchase didn’t garner unwanted attention.
News of the failed crop came in, and sitting in the coffeehouse, the boys
had watched the prices on the chalkboard rise, trying to contain their glee.
When Mister Hertzoon thought the shares had gone as high as they could
go, he sent Jordie and Filip to sell out and collect. They’d returned to the
coffeehouse, and Mister Hertzoon had handed both of them their profits
straight from his safe.
“What did I tell you?” Jordie said to Kaz as they headed out into the
Ketterdam night. “Luck and good friends!”
Only a few days later, Mister Hertzoon told them of another tip he’d
received from his friend the captain, who’d had similar word on the next
crop of jurda. “The rains are hitting everyone hard this year,” Mister
Hertzoon said. “But this time, not only the fields were destroyed, but the
warehouses down by the docks in Eames. This is going to be big money,
and I intend to go in heavy.”
“Then we should, too,” said Filip.
Mister Hertzoon had frowned. “I’m afraid this isn’t a deal for you, boys.
The minimum investment is far too high for either of you. But there will be
more trades to come!”
Filip had been furious. He’d yelled at Mister Hertzoon, told him it wasn’t
fair. He said Mister Hertzoon was just like the merchants at the Exchange,
hoarding all the riches for himself, and called Mister Hertzoon names that
had made Kaz cringe. When he’d stormed out, everyone at the coffeehouse
had stared at Mister Hertzoon’s red, embarrassed face.
He’d gone back to his office and slouched down in his chair. “I … I can’t
help the way business is done. The men running the trade want only big
investors, people who can support the risk.”
Jordie and Kaz had stood there, unsure of what to do.
“Are you angry with me, too?” asked Mister Hertzoon.
Of course not, they assured him. Filip was the one who was being unfair.
“I understand why he’s angry,” said Mister Hertzoon. “Opportunities like
this one don’t come along often, but there’s nothing to be done.”
“I have money,” said Jordie.
Mister Hertzoon had smiled indulgently. “Jordie, you’re a good lad, and
some day I have no doubt you’ll be a king of the Exchange, but you don’t
have the kind of funds these investors require.”
Jordie’s chin had gone up. “I do. From the sale of my father ’s farm.”
“And I expect it’s all you and Kaz have to live on. That’s not something to
be risked on a trade, no matter how certain the outcome. A child your age
has no business—”
“I’m not a child. If it’s a good opportunity, I want to take it.”
Kaz would always remember that moment, when he’d seen greed take hold
of his brother, an invisible hand guiding him onward, the lever at work.
Mister Hertzoon had taken a lot of convincing. They’d all gone back to the
Zelverstraat house and discussed it well into the night. Kaz had fallen
asleep with his head on the silver dog’s side and Saskia’s red ribbon
clutched in his hand.
When Jordie finally roused him, the candles had burned low, and it was
already morning. Mister Hertzoon had asked his business partner to come
over and draw up a contract for a loan from Jordie.
Because of his age, Jordie would loan Mister Hertzoon the money, and
Mister Hertzoon would place the trade. Margit gave them milk tea and
warm pancakes with sour cream and jam. Then they’d all walked to the
bank that held the funds from the sale of the farm and Jordie signed them
over.
Mister Hertzoon insisted on escorting them back to their boarding house,
and he’d hugged them at the door. He handed the loan agreement to Jordie
and warned him to keep it safe. “Now, Jordie,” he said. “There is only a
small chance that this trade will go bad, but there is always a chance. If it
does, I’m relying on you not to use that document to call in your loan. We
both must take the risk together. I am trusting you.”
Jordie had beamed. “The deal is the deal,” he said.
“The deal is the deal,” said Mister Hertzoon proudly, and they shook hands
like proper merchants.
Mister Hertzoon handed Jordie a thick roll of kruge. “For a fine dinner to
celebrate. Come back to the coffeehouse a week from today, and we’ll
watch the prices rise together.”
That week they’d played ridderspel and spijker at the arcades on the Lid.
They’d bought Jordie a fine new coat and Kaz a new pair of soft leather
boots. They’d eaten waffles and fried potatoes, and Jordie had purchased
every novel he craved at a bookshop on Wijnstraat. When the week was
over, they’d walked hand in hand to the coffeehouse.
It was empty. The front door was locked and bolted. When they pressed
their faces to the dark windows, they saw that everything was gone – the
tables and chairs and big copper urns, the chalkboard where the figures for
the day’s trades had been posted.
“Do we have the wrong corner?” asked Kaz.
But they knew they didn’t. In nervous silence, they walked to the house on
Zelverstraat. No one answered their knock on the bright blue door.
“They’ve just gone out for a while,” said Jordie. They waited on the steps
for hours, until the sun began to set. No one came or went. No candles were
lit in the windows.
Finally, Jordie worked up the courage to knock on a neighbour ’s door.
“Yes?” said the maid who answered in her little white cap.
“Do you know where the family next door has gone? The Hertzoons?”
The maid’s brow furrowed. “I think they were just visiting for a time from
Zierfoort.”
“No,” Jordie said. “They’ve lived here for years. They—”
The maid shook her head. “That house stood empty for nearly a year after
the last family moved away. It was only rented a few weeks ago.”
“But—”
She’d closed the door in his face.
Kaz and Jordie said nothing to each other, not on the walk home or as they
climbed the stairs to their little room in the boarding house. They sat in the
growing gloom for a long time. Voices floated back to them from the canal
below as people went about their evening business.
“Something happened to them,” Jordie said at last. “There was an accident
or an emergency. He’ll write soon. He’ll send for us.”
That night, Kaz took Saskia’s red ribbon from beneath his pillow. He rolled
it into a neat spiral and clutched it in his palm. He lay in bed and tried to
pray, but all he could think about was the magician’s coin: there and then
gone.
It was too much. He hadn’t anticipated how difficult it would be to see his
homeland for the first time in so long. He’d had over a week aboard the
Ferolind to prepare, but his head had been full of the path he’d chosen, of
Nina, of the cruel magic that had taken him from his prison cell and placed
him on a boat speeding north beneath a limitless sky, still bound not just by
shackles but by the burden of what he was about to do.
He got his first glimpse of the northern coast late in the afternoon, but
Specht decided to wait until dusk to make land in hopes the twilight would
lend them some cover. There were whaling villages along the shore, and no
one was eager to be spotted. Despite their cover as trappers, the Dregs were
still a conspicuous group.
They spent the night on the ship. At dawn the next morning, Nina had
found him assembling the cold weather gear Jesper and Inej had distributed.
Matthias was impressed by Inej’s resilience.
Though she still had circles beneath her eyes, she moved without stiffness,
and if she was in pain, she hid it well.
Nina held up a key. “Kaz sent me to remove your shackles.”
“Are you going to lock me in again at night?”
“That’s up to Kaz. And you, I suppose. Have a seat.”
“Just give me the key.”
Nina cleared her throat. “He also wants me to tailor you.”
“What? Why?” The thought of Nina altering his appearance with her
witchcraft was intolerable.
“We’re in Fjerda now. He wants you looking a little less … like yourself,
just in case.”
“Do you know how big this country is? The chance that—”
“The odds of you being recognised will be considerably higher at the Ice
Court, and I can’t make changes to your appearance all at once.”
“Why?”
“I’m not that good a Tailor. It’s part of all Corporalki training now, but I just
don’t have an affinity for it.”
Matthias snorted.
“What?” she asked.
“I’ve never heard you admit you’re not good at something.”
“Well, it happens so rarely.”
He was horrified to find his lips curling in a smile, but it was easy enough
to quell when he thought of his face being changed. “What does Brekker
want you to do to me?”
“Nothing radical. I’ll change your eye colour, your hair – what you have of
it. It won’t be permanent.”
“I don’t want this.” I don’t want you near me.
“It won’t take long, and it will be painless, but if you want to argue about it
with Kaz …”
“Fine,” he said, steeling himself. It was pointless to argue with Brekker, not
when he could simply taunt Matthias with the promise of the pardon.
Matthias picked up a bucket, flipped it over, and sat down. “Can I have the
key now?”
She handed it over to him and he unshackled his wristsas she rooted around
in a box she’d brought over. It had a handle and several little drawers
stuffed with powders and pigments in tiny jars. She extracted a pot of
something black from a drawer.
“What is it?”
“Black antimony.” She stepped close to him, tilting his chin back with the
tip of her finger.
“Unclench your jaw, Matthias. You’re going to grind your teeth down to
nothing.”
He crossed his arms.
She started shaking some of the antimony over his scalp and gave a rueful
sigh. “Why does the brave drüskelle Matthias Helvar eat no meat?” she
asked in a theatrical voice as she worked. “’Tis a sad story indeed, my
child. His teeth were winnowed away by a vexatious Grisha, and now he
can eat only pudding.”
“Stop that,” he grumbled.
“What? Keep your head tilted back.”
“What are you doing?”
“Darkening your brows and lashes. You know, the way girls do before a
party.” He must have grimaced because she burst out laughing. “The look
on your face!”
She leaned in, the waves of her brown hair brushing against his cheeks as
she bled the colour from the antimony into his brows. Her hand cupped his
cheek.
“Shut your eyes,” she murmured. Her thumbs moved over his lashes, and he
realised he was holding his breath.
“You don’t smell like roses any more,” he said, then wanted to kick himself.
He shouldn’t be noticing her scent.
“I probably smell like boat.”
No, she smelled sweet, perfect like … “Toffee?”
Her eyes slid away guiltily. “Kaz said to pack what we needed for the
journey. A girl has to eat.”
She reached into her pocket and drew out a bag of toffees. “Want one?”
Yes. “No.”
She shrugged and popped one in her mouth. Her eyes rolled back, and she
sighed happily. “So good.”
It was a humiliating epiphany, but he knew he could have watched her eat
all day. This was one of the things he’d liked best about Nina – she
savoured everything, whether it was a toffee or cold water from a stream or
dried reindeer meat.
“Eyes now,” she said around the candy as she pulled a tiny bottle from her
case. “You’ll have to keep them open.”
“What is that?” he asked nervously.
“A tincture developed by a Grisha named Genya Safin. It’s the safest way
to change eye colour.”
Again she leaned in. Her cheeks were rosy from the cold, her mouth slightly
open. Her lips were bare inches from his. If he sat up straighter, they’d be
kissing.
“You have to look at me,” she instructed.
I am. He shifted his gaze to hers. Do you remember this shore, Nina? he
wanted to ask, though he knew she must.
“What colour are you making my eyes?”
“Shhh. This is difficult.” She dabbed the drops onto her fingers and held
them close to his eyes.
“Why can’t you just put them in?”
“Why can’t you stop talking? Do you want me to blind you?”
He stopped talking.
Finally, she drew back, gaze roving over his features. “Brownish,” she said.
Then she winked.
“Like toffee.”
“What do you intend to do about Bo Yul-Bayur?”
She straightened and stepped away, her expression shuttering. “What do
you mean?”
He was sorry to see her easy manner go, but that didn’t matter. He glanced
over his shoulder to make sure no one was listening. “You know exactly
what I mean. I don’t believe for a second you’ll let these people hand Bo
Yul-Bayur over to the Kerch Merchant Council.”
She put the bottle back in one of the little drawers. “We’ll have to do this at
least two more times before we get to the Ice Court so I can deepen the
colour. Get your things together. Kaz wants us ready to leave on the hour.”
She snapped the top of the case closed and picked up the shackles. Then she
was gone.
By the time they bid their goodbyes to the ship’s crew, the sky had turned
from pink to gold.
“See you in Djerholm harbour,” Specht called. “No mourners.”
“No funerals,” the others replied. Strange people.
Brekker had been frustratingly tight-lipped about how exactly they were
going to reach Bo Yul-Bayur and then get out of the Ice Court with the
scientist in tow, but he’d been clear that once they had their prize, the
Ferolind was their escape route. It had papers bearing the Kerch seal and
indicating that all fees and applications had been made for representatives
of the Haanraadt Bay Company to transport furs and goods from Fjerda to
Zierfoort, a port city in south Kerch.
They began the march from the rocky shore up the cliff side. Spring was
coming, but ice was still thick on the ground, and it was a tough climb.
When they reached the top of the cliff, they stopped to catch their breath.
The Ferolind was still visible on the horizon, its sails full of the wind that
whipped at their cheeks.
“Saints,” said Inej. “We’re actually doing this.”
“I’ve spent every minute of every miserable day wishing to be off that
ship,” said Jesper. “So why do I suddenly miss it?”
Wylan stamped his boots. “Maybe because it already feels like our feet are
going to freeze off.”
“When we get our money, you can burn kruge to keep you warm,” said
Kaz. “Let’s go.” He’d left his crow’s head cane aboard the Ferolind and
substituted a less conspicuous walking stick. Jesper had mournfully left
behind his prized pearl-handled revolvers in favour of a pair of
unornamented guns, and Inej had done the same with her extraordinary set
of knives and daggers, keeping only those she could bear to part with when
they entered the prison. Practical choices, but Matthias knew that talismans
had their power.
Jesper consulted his compass, and they turned south, seeking a path that
would lead them to the main trading road. “I’m going to pay someone to
burn my kruge for me.”
Kaz fell into step beside him. “Why don’t you pay someone else to pay
someone to burn your kruge for you? That’s what the big players do.”
“You know what the really big bosses do? They pay someone to pay
someone to …”
Their voices trailed off as they tromped ahead, and Matthias and the others
followed after. But he noticed that each of them cast a final backwards
glance at the vanishing Ferolind. The schooner was a part of Kerch, a piece
of home for them, and that last familiar thing was drifting further away with
every moment.
Matthias felt some small measure of sympathy, but as they trekked through
the morning, he had to admit he enjoyed seeing the canal rats shiver and
struggle a bit for once. They thought they knew cold, but the white north
had a way of forcing strangers to reevaluate their terms. They stumbled and
staggered, awkward in their new boots, trying to find the trick of walking in
hard-crusted snow, and soon Matthias was in the lead, setting the pace,
though Jesper kept a steady eye on his compass.
“Put your …” Matthias paused and had to gesture to Wylan. He didn’t know
the Kerch word for
‘goggles’ or even ‘snow’, for that matter. They weren’t terms that came up
in prison. “Keep your eyes covered, or you could damage them
permanently.” Men went blind this far north; they lost lips, ears, noses,
hands, and feet. The land was barren and brutal, and that was all most
people saw. But to Matthias it was beautiful. The ice bore the spirit of Djel.
It had colour and shape and even a scent if you knew to seek it out.
He pushed ahead, feeling almost at peace, as if here Djel could hear him
and ease his troubled mind. The ice brought back memories of childhood,
of hunting with his father. They’d lived further south, near Halmhend, but
in the winters that part of Fjerda didn’t look much different from this, a
world of white and grey, broken by groves of black-limbed trees and jutting
clusters of rock that seemed to have risen up from nowhere, shipwrecks on
a bare ocean floor.
The first day trekking was like a cleansing – little talk, the white hush of the
north welcoming Matthias back without judgement. He’d expected more
complaints, but even Wylan had simply put his head down and walked.
They’re all survivors, Matthias understood. They adapt. When the sun
began to set, they ate their rations of dried beef and hardtack and collapsed
into their tents without a word.
But the next morning brought an end to the quiet and Matthias’ fragile
sense of peace. Now that they were off the ship and away from its crew,
Kaz was ready to dig into the details of the plan.
“If we get this right, we’re going to be in and out of the Ice Court before the
Fjerdans ever know their prize scientist is gone,” Kaz said as they
shouldered their packs and continued to push south.
“When we enter the prison, we’ll be taken to the holding area beneath the
men’s and women’s cellblocks to await charges. If Matthias is right and the
procedures are still the same, the patrols only pass through the holding cells
three times a day for head counts. Once we’re out of the cells, we should
have at least six hours to cross to the embassy, locate Yul-Bayur on the
White Island, and get him down to the harbour before they realise anyone is
missing.”
“What about the other prisoners in the holding cells?” Matthias asked.
“We have that covered.”
Matthias scowled, but he wasn’t particularly surprised. Once they were in
those holding cells, Kaz and the others would be at their most vulnerable. It
would take only a word to the guards for Matthias to put an end to all their
scheming. That was what Brum would do, what an honourable man would
choose. Some part of Matthias had believed that coming back to Fjerda
would return him to his senses, give him the strength to forsake this mad
quest; instead it had only made his longing for home, for the life he’d once
lived among his drüskelle brothers more acute.
“Once we’re out of the cells,” Kaz continued, “Matthias and Jesper will
secure rope from the stables while Wylan and I get Nina and Inej out of the
women’s holding area. The basement is our meet. That’s where the
incinerator is, and no one should be in the laundry after the prison shuts
down for the night. While Inej makes the climb, Wylan and I scour the
laundry for anything he can use for demo. And just in case the Fjerdans
decided to stash Bo Yul-Bayur in the prison and make life easy on us, Nina,
Matthias, and Jesper will search the top level cells.”
“Nina and Matthias?” Jesper asked. “Far be it from me to doubt anyone’s
professionalism, but is that really the ideal pairing?”
Matthias bit down on his anger. Jesper was right, but he hated being
discussed in this way.
“Matthias knows prison procedure, and Nina can handle any guards without
a noisy fight. Your job is to keep them from killing each other.”
“Because I’m the diplomat of the group?”
“There is no diplomat of the group. Now listen,” Kaz said. “The rest of the
prison isn’t like the holding area. Patrols in the cellblock rotate every two
hours, and we don’t want to risk anyone sounding an alarm, so be smart. We
coordinate everything to the chiming of the Elderclock. We’re out of the
cells right after six bells, we’re up the incinerator and on the roof by eight
bells. No exceptions.”
“And then what?” asked Wylan.
“We cross to the embassy sector roof and get access to the glass bridge
through there.”
“We’ll be on the other side of the checkpoints,” said Matthias, unable to
keep a hint of admiration from his voice. “The guards on the bridge will
assume we passed through the embassy gate and had our papers scrutinised
there.”
Wylan frowned. “In prison uniforms?”
“Phase two,” said Jesper. “The fake.”
“That’s right,” said Kaz. “Inej, Nina, Matthias, and I will borrow a change
of clothes from one of the delegations – and a little something extra for our
friend Bo Yul-Bayur when we find him – and stroll across the glass bridge.
We locate Yul-Bayur and get him back to the embassy. Nina, if there’s time,
you’ll tailor him as much as possible, but as long as we don’t trigger any
alarms, no one is going to notice one more Shu among the guests.”
Unless Matthias managed to get to the scientist first. If he was dead when
the others found him, Kaz couldn’t hold Matthias responsible. He’d still get
his pardon. And if he never managed to separate from the group? A
shipboard accident might still befall Yul-Bayur on the journey back.
“So what I’m getting from this,” said Jesper, “is that I’m stuck with
Wylan.”
“Unless you’ve suddenly acquired an encyclopedic knowledge of the White
Island, the ability to pick locks, scale unscalable walls, or flirt confidential
information out of high level officials, yes.
Besides, I want two sets of hands making bombs.”
Jesper looked mournfully at his guns. “Such potential wasted.”
Nina crossed her arms. “Let’s say this all works. How do we get out?”
“We walk,” Kaz said. “That’s the beauty of this plan. Remember what I said
about guiding the mark’s attention? At the embassy gate, all eyes will be
focused on guests coming into the Ice Court.
People leaving aren’t a security risk.”
“Then why the bombs?” asked Wylan.
“Precautions. There are seven miles of road between the Ice Court and the
harbour. If someone notices Bo Yul-Bayur is missing, we’re going to have
to cover that territory fast.” He drew a line in the snow with his walking
stick. “The main road crosses a gorge. We blow the bridge, no one can
follow.”
Matthias put his head in his hands, imagining the havoc these low creatures
were about to wreak on his country’s capital.
“It’s one prisoner, Helvar,” said Kaz.
“And a bridge,” Wylan put in helpfully.
“And anything we have to blow up in between,” added Jesper.
“Everyone shut up,” Matthias growled.
Jesper shrugged. “Fjerdans.”
“I don’t like any of this,” said Nina.
Kaz raised a brow. “Well, at least you and Helvar found something to agree
on.”
Further south they travelled, the coast long gone, the ice broken more and
more by slashes of forest, glimpses of black earth and animal tracks, proof
of the living world, the heart of Djel beating always.
The questions from the others were ceaseless.
“How many guard towers are on the White Island again?”
“Do you think Yul-Bayur will be in the palace?”
“There are guard barracks on the White Island. What if he’s in the
barracks?”
Jesper and Wylan debated which kinds of explosives might be assembled
from the prison laundry
supplies and if they could get their hands on some gunpowder in the
embassy sector. Nina tried to help Inej estimate what her pace would have
to be to scale the incinerator shaft with enough time to secure the rope and
get the others to the top.
They drilled each other constantly on the architecture and procedures of the
Court, the layout of the ringwall’s three gatehouses, each built around a
courtyard.
“First checkpoint?”
“Four guards.”
“Second checkpoint?”
“Eight guards.”
“Ringwall gates?”
“Four when the gate is nonoperational.”
They were like a maddening chorus of crows, squawking in Matthias’ ear:
Traitor, traitor, traitor.
“Yellow Protocol?” asked Kaz.
“Sector disturbance,” said Inej.
“Red Protocol?”
“Sector breach.”
“Black Protocol?”
“We’re all doomed?” said Jesper.
“That about covers it,” Matthias said, pulling his hood tighter and trudging
ahead. They’d even made him imitate the different patterns of the bells. A
necessity, but he’d felt like a fool chanting,
“Bing bong bing bing bong. No, wait, bing bing bong bing bing.”
“When I’m rich,” Jesper said behind him. “I’m going somewhere I never
have to see snow again.
What about you, Wylan?”
“I don’t know exactly.”
“I think you should buy a golden piano—”
“Flute.”
“And play concerts on a pleasure barge. You can park it in the canal right
outside your father ’s house.”
“Nina can sing,” Inej put in.
“We’ll duet,” Nina amended. “Your father will have to move.”
She did have a terrible singing voice. He hated that he knew that, but he
couldn’t resist glancing over his shoulder. Nina’s hood had fallen back, and
the thick waves of her hair had escaped her collar.
Why do I keep doing that? he thought in a rush of frustration. It had
happened aboard the ship, too.
He’d tell himself to ignore her, and the next thing he knew his eyes would
be seeking her out.
But it was foolish to pretend that she wasn’t in his mind. He and Nina had
walked this same territory together. If his calculations were right, they’d
washed up only a few miles from where the Ferolind had put into shore. It
had started with a storm, and in a way, that storm had never ended. Nina
had blown into his life with the wind and rain and set his world spinning.
He’d been off balance ever since.
The storm had come out of nowhere, tossing the ship like a toy on the
waves. The sea had played along until it had tired of the game, and dragged
their boat under in a tangle of rope and sail and screaming men.
Matthias remembered the darkness of the water, the terrible cold, the silence
of the deep. The next thing he knew, he was spitting up salt water, gasping
for breath. Someone had an arm around his chest, and they were moving
through the water. The cold was unbearable, yet somehow he was bearing
it.
“Wake up, you miserable lump of muscle.” Clean Fjerdan, pure, spoken like
a noble. He turned his head and was shocked to see that the young witch
they’d captured on the southern coast of the Wandering Isle had hold of him
and was muttering to herself in Ravkan. He’d known she wasn’t really
Kaelish. Somehow she’d got free of her bonds and the cages. Every part of
him went into a panic, and if he’d been less shocked or numb, he would
have struggled.
“Move,” she told him in Fjerdan, panting. “Saints, what do they feed you?
You weigh about as much as a haycart.”
She was struggling badly, swimming for both of them. She’d saved his life.
Why?
He shifted in her arms, kicking his legs to help drive them forward. To his
surprise, he heard her give a low sob. “Thank the Saints,” she said. “Swim,
you giant oaf.”
“Where are we?” he asked.
“I don’t know,” she replied, and he could hear the terror in her voice.
He kicked away from her.
“Don’t!” she cried. “Don’t let go!”
But he shoved hard, breaking her hold. The moment he left her arms, the
cold rushed in. The pain was sharp and sudden, and his limbs went
sluggish. She’d been using her sick magic to keep him warm. He reached
for her in the dark.
“Drüsje? ” he called, ashamed of the fear in his voice. It was the Fjerdan
word for witch, but he had no name for her.
“Drüskelle! ” she shouted, and then he felt his fingers brush against hers in
the black water. He grabbed hold and drew her to him. Her body didn’t feel
warm exactly, but as soon as they made contact, the pain in his own limbs
receded. He was gripped by gratitude and revulsion.
“We have to find land,” she gasped. “I can’t swim and keep both of our
hearts beating.”
“I’ll swim,” he said. “You … I’ll swim.” He clasped her back to his chest,
his arm looped under hers and across her body, the way she’d been holding
him only moments ago, as if she were drowning. And she was, they both
were, or they would be soon if they didn’t freeze to death first.
He kicked his legs steadily, trying not to expend too much energy, but they
both knew it was probably futile. They hadn’t been far from land when the
storm had hit, but it was completely dark.
They might be headed towards the coastline or further out to sea.
There was no sound but their breathing, the slosh of the water, the roll of
the waves. He kept them moving – though they might well have been
paddling in a circle – and she kept both of them breathing. Which one of
them would give out first, he didn’t know.
“Why did you save me?” he asked finally.
“Stop wasting energy. Don’t talk.”
“Why did you do it?”
“Because you’re a human being,” she said angrily.
Lies. If they did make land, she’d need a Fjerdan to help her survive,
someone who knew the land, though clearly she knew the language. Of
course she did. They were all deceivers and spies, trained to prey on people
like him, people without their unnatural gifts. They were predators.
He continued to kick, but the muscles in his legs were tiring, and he could
feel the cold creeping in on him.
“Giving up already, witch?”
He felt her shake off her exhaustion, and blood rushed back into his fingers
and toes.
“I’ll match your pace, drüskelle. If we die, it will be your burden to bear in
the next life.”
He had to smile a little at that. She certainly didn’t lack for spine. That
much had been clear even when she was caged.
That was the way they went on that night, taunting each other whenever one
of them faltered. They knew only the sea, the ice, the occasional splash that
might have been a wave or something hungry moving towards them in the
water.
“Look,” the witch whispered when dawn came, rosy and blithe. There, in
the distance, he could just make out a jutting promontory of ice and the
blessed black slash of a dark gravel shore. Land.
They wasted no time on relief or celebration. The witch tilted her head
back, resting it against his shoulder as he drove forward, inch by miserable
inch, each wave pulling them back, as if the sea was unwilling to relinquish
its hold. At last, their feet touched bottom, and they were half swimming,
half crawling to shore. They broke apart, and Matthias’ body flooded with
misery as he dragged himself over the black rocks to the dead and frozen
land.
Walking was impossible at first. Both of them moved in fits and starts,
trying to get their limbs to obey, shuddering with cold. Finally he made it to
his feet. He thought about just walking off, finding shelter without her. She
was on her hands and knees, head bent, her hair a wet and tangled mess
covering her face. He had the distinct sense that she was going to lie down
and simply not get back up.
He took one step, then another. Then he turned back. Whatever her reasons,
she’d saved his life last night, not once, but again and again. That was a
blood debt.
He staggered back to her and offered his hand.
When she looked up at him, the expression on her face was a bleak map of
loathing and fatigue. In it, he saw the shame that came with gratitude, and
he knew that in this brief moment, she was his mirror. She didn’t want to
owe him anything, either.
He could make the decision for her. He owed her that much. He reached
down and yanked her to
her feet, and they limped together off the beach.
They headed what Matthias hoped was west. The sun could play tricks on
your senses this far north and they had no compass with which to navigate.
It was almost dark, and Matthias had begun to feel the stirrings of real panic
when they finally spotted the first of the whaling camps. It was deserted –
the outposts were only active in the spring – and little more than a round
lodge made of bone, sod, and animal skins. But shelter meant they might at
least survive the night.
The door had no lock. They practically fell through it.
“Thank you,” she groaned as she collapsed beside the circular hearth.
He said nothing. Finding the camp had been mere luck. If they’d washed up
even a few miles further up the coast they would have been done for.
The whalers had left peat and dry kindling in the hearth. Matthias laboured
over the fire, trying to get it to do more than smoke. He was clumsy and
tired and hungry enough that he would have gladly gnawed the leather off
his boot. When he heard a rustling behind him, he turned and almost
dropped the piece of driftwood he’d been using to coax the little flames.
“What are you doing?” he barked.
She had glanced over her shoulder – her very bare shoulder – and said, “Is
there something I’m supposed to be doing?”
“Put your clothes back on!”
She rolled her eyes. “I’m not going to freeze to death to preserve your sense
of modesty.”
He gave the fire a stern jab, but she ignored him and stripped off the rest of
her clothes – tunic, trousers, even her underthings – then wrapped herself in
one of the grimy reindeer skins that had been piled near the door.
“Saints, this smells,” she grumbled, shuffling over and assembling a nest of
the few other pelts and blankets beside the fire. Every time she moved, the
reindeer cloak parted, revealing a flash of round calf, white skin, the
shadow between her breasts. It was deliberate. He knew it. She was trying
to rattle him. He needed to focus on the fire. He’d almost died, and if he
didn’t get a fire started, he still might.
If only she would stop making so much damn noise. The driftwood snapped
in his hands.
Nina snorted and lay down in the nest of pelts, propping herself on one
elbow. “For Saint’s sake, drüskelle, what’s wrong with you? I just wanted to
be warm. I promise not to ravish you in your sleep.”
“I’m not afraid of you,” he said irritably.
Her grin was vicious. “Then you’re as stupid as you look.”
He stayed crouching beside the fire. He knew he was meant to lie down
next to her. The sun had set, and the temperature was dropping. He was
struggling to keep his teeth from chattering, and they would need each other
’s warmth to get through the night. It shouldn’t have concerned him, but he
didn’t want to be near her. Because she’s a killer, he told himself. That’s
why. She’s a killer and a witch.
He forced himself to rise and stride towards the blankets. But Nina held out
a hand to stop him.
“Don’t even think about getting near me in those clothes. You’re soaked
through.”
“You can keep our blood flowing.”
“I’m exhausted,” she said angrily. “And once I fall asleep, all we’ll have is
that fire to keep us warm. I can see you shaking from here. Are all Fjerdans
this prudish?”
No. Maybe. He didn’t really know. The drüskelle were a holy order. They
were meant to live chastely until they took wives – good Fjerdan wives who
didn’t run around yelling at people and taking their clothes off.
“Are all Grisha so immodest?” he asked defensively.
“Boys and girls train side by side together in the First and Second Armies.
There isn’t a lot of room for maidenly blushing.”
“It’s not natural for women to fight.”
“It’s not natural for someone to be as stupid as he is tall, and yet there you
stand. Did you really swim all those miles just to die in this hut?”
“It’s a lodge, and you don’t know that we swam miles.”
Nina blew out an exasperated breath and curled up on her side, burrowing
as close as she could get to the fire. “I’m too tired to argue.” She closed her
eyes. “I can’t believe your face is going to be the last thing I see before I
die.”
He felt like she was daring him. Matthias stood there feeling foolish and
hating her for making him feel that way. He turned his back on her and
quickly sloughed off his sodden clothes, spreading them beside the fire. He
glanced once at her to make sure she wasn’t looking then strode to the
blankets and wriggled in behind her, still trying to keep his distance.
“Closer, drüskelle,” she crooned, taunting.
He threw an arm over her, hooking her back against his chest. She let out a
startled oof and shifted uneasily.
“Stop moving,” he muttered. He’d been close to girls – not many, it was
true – but none of them had been like her. She was indecently round.
“You’re cold and clammy,” she complained with a shiver. “It’s like lying
next to a burly squid.”
“You told me to get closer!”
“Ease up a bit,” she instructed and when he did, she flipped over to face
him.
“What are you doing?” he asked, pulling back in a panic.
“Relax, drüskelle. This isn’t where I have my way with you.”
His blue eyes narrowed. “I hate the way you talk.” Did he imagine the hurt
that flashed across her face? As if his words could have any effect on this
witch.
She confirmed he’d been imagining things when she said, “Do you think I
care what you like or
don’t like?”
She laid her hands on his chest, focusing on his heart. He shouldn’t let her
do this, shouldn’t show his weakness, but as his blood began to flow and his
body warmed, the relief and ease that coursed through him felt too good to
resist.
He let himself relax slightly, grudgingly, beneath her palms. She flipped
over and pulled his arm back around her. “You’re welcome, you big idiot.”
He’d lied. He did like the way she talked.
He still did. He could hear her yammering to Inej somewhere behind him,
trying to teach her Fjerdan words. “No, Hring-kaaalle. You have to hang on
the last syllable a bit.”
“Hringalah?” tried Inej.
“Better but – here, it’s like Kerch is a gazelle. It hops from word to word,”
she pantomimed.
“Fjerdan is like gulls, all swoops and dives.” Her hands became birds riding
currents on the air. At that moment, she looked up and caught him staring.
He cleared his throat. “Do not eat the snow,” he counselled. “It will only
dehydrate you and lower your body temperature.” He plunged forward,
eager to be up the next hill with some distance between them. But as he
came over the rise, he halted dead in his tracks.
He turned round, holding out his arms. “Stop! You don’t want to—”
But it was too late. Nina clapped her hands over her mouth. Inej made some
kind of warding sign in the air. Jesper shook his head, and Wylan gagged.
Kaz stood like a stone, his expression inscrutable.
The pyre had been made on a bluff. Whoever was responsible had tried to
build the fire in the shelter of a rock outcropping, but it hadn’t been enough
to keep the flames from dying out in the wind. Three stakes had been driven
into the icy ground, and three charred bodies were bound to them, their
blackened, cracked skin still smouldering.
“Ghezen,” swore Wylan. “What is this?”
“This is what Fjerdans do to Grisha.” Nina said. Her face was slack, her
green eyes staring.
“It’s what criminals do,” said Matthias, his insides churning. “The pyres
have been illegal since—”
Nina whirled on him and shoved his chest hard. “Don’t you dare,” she
seethed, fury burning like a halo around her. “Tell me the last time someone
was prosecuted for putting a Grisha to the flames. Do you even call it
murder when you put down dogs?”
“Nina—”
“Do you have a different name for killing when you wear a uniform to do
it?”
They heard it then – a moan, like a creaking wind.
“Saints,” Jesper said. “One of them is alive.”
The sound came again, thin and keening, from the black hulk of the body
on the far right. It was impossible to tell if the shape was male or female. Its
hair had burned away, its clothing fused to its limbs. Black flakes of skin
had peeled away in places, showing raw flesh.
A sob tore from Nina’s throat. She raised her hands but she was shaking too
badly to use her power to end the creature’s suffering. She turned her tearfilled eyes to the others. “I … Please, someone …”
Jesper moved first. Two shots rang out, and the body fell silent. Jesper
returned his pistols to their holsters.
“Damn it, Jesper,” Kaz growled. “You just announced our presence for
miles.”
“So they think we’re a hunting party.”
“You should have let Inej do it.”
“I didn’t want to do it,” Inej said quietly. “Thank you, Jesper.”
Kaz’s jaw ticked, but he said nothing more.
“Thank you,” Nina choked out. She plunged ahead over the frozen ground,
following the shape of the path through the snow. She was weeping,
stumbling over the terrain. Matthias followed. There were few landmarks
here, and it was easy to get turned around.
“Nina, you musn’t stray from the group—”
“That’s what you’re going back to, Helvar,” she said harshly. “That’s the
country you long to serve. Does it make you proud?”
“I’ve never sent a Grisha to the pyre. Grisha are given a fair trial—”
She turned on him, goggles up, tears frozen on her cheeks.
“Then why has a Grisha never been found innocent at the end of your
supposedly fair trials?”
“I—”
“Because our crime is existing. Our crime is what we are.”
Matthias went quiet, and when he spoke he was caught between shame for
what he was about to say and the need to speak the words, the words he’d
been raised on, the words that still rang true for him.
“Nina, has it ever occurred to you that maybe … you weren’t meant to
exist?”
Nina’s eyes glinted green fire. She took a step towards him, and he could
feel the rage radiating off her. “Maybe you’re the ones who shouldn’t exist,
Helvar. Weak and soft, with your short lives and your sad little prejudices.
You worship woodsprites and ice spirits who can’t be bothered to show
themselves, but you see real power, and you can’t wait to stamp it out.”
“Don’t mock what you don’t understand.”
“My mockery offends you? My people would welcome your laughter in
place of this barbarity.” A look of supreme satisfaction crossed her face.
“Ravka is rebuilding. So is the Second Army, and when they do, I hope they
give you the fair trial you deserve. I hope they put the drüskelle in shackles
and make them stand to hear their crimes enumerated so the world will have
an accounting of your evils.”
“If you’re so desperate to see Ravka rise, why aren’t you there now?”
“I want you to have your pardon, Helvar. I want you to be here when the
Second Army marches north and overruns every inch of this wasteland. I
hope they burn your fields and salt the earth. I hope they send your friends
and your family to the pyre.”
“They already did, Zenik. My mother, my father, my baby sister. Inferni
soldiers, your precious, persecuted Grisha, burned our village to the ground.
I have nothing left to lose.”
Nina’s laugh was bitter. “Maybe your stay in Hellgate was too short,
Matthias. There’s always more to lose.”
I can smell them. Nina batted at her hair and clothes as she lurched through
the snow, trying not to retch. She couldn’t stop seeing those bodies, the
angry red flesh peeking through their burned black casings like banked
coals. It felt as if she was coated in their ashes, in the stink of burning flesh.
She couldn’t take a full breath.
Being around Matthias made it easy to forget what he really was, what he
really thought of her.
She’d tailored him again just this morning, enduring his glowers and
grumbling. No, enjoying them, grateful for the excuse to be near him,
ridiculously pleased every time she brought him close to a laugh. Saints,
why do I care? Why did one smile from Matthias Helvar feel like fifty from
someone else? She’d felt his heart race when she’d tipped his head back to
work on his eyes. She’d thought about kissing him. She’d wanted to kiss
him, and she was pretty sure he’d been thinking the same thing. Or maybe
he was thinking about strangling me again.
She hadn’t forgotten what he’d said aboard the Ferolind, when he’d asked
what she intended to do about Bo Yul-Bayur, if she truly meant to hand the
scientist over to the Kerch. If she sabotaged Kaz’s mission, would it cost
Matthias his pardon? She couldn’t do that. No matter what he was, she
owed him his freedom.
Three weeks she’d travelled with Matthias after the shipwreck. They hadn’t
had a compass, hadn’t known where they were going. They hadn’t even
known where on the northern shore they’d washed
up. They’d spent long days slogging through the snow, freezing nights in
whatever rudimentary shelter they could assemble or in the deserted huts of
whaling camps when they were lucky enough to come across them. They’d
eaten roasted seaweed and whatever grasses or tubers they could find.
When they’d found a stash of dried reindeer meat at the bottom of a travel
pack in one of the camps, it had been like some kind of miracle. They’d
gnawed on it in mute bliss, feeling nearly drunk on its flavour.
After the first night, they’d slept in all the dry clothes and blankets they
could find but on opposite sides of the fire. If they didn’t have wood or
kindling, they curled against one another, barely touching, but by morning,
they’d be pressed together, breathing in tandem, cocooned in muzzy sleep, a
single crescent moon.
Every morning he complained that she was impossible to wake.
“It’s like trying to raise a corpse.”
“The dead request five more minutes,” she would say, and bury her head in
the furs.
He’d stomp around, packing their few things as loudly as possible,
grumbling to himself. “Lazy, ridiculous, selfish …” until she finally roused
herself and set about preparing for the day.
“What’s the first thing you’re going to do when you get home?” she asked
him on one of their endless days trekking through the snow, hoping to find
some sign of civilization.
“Sleep,” he said. “Bathe. Pray for my lost friends.”
“Oh yes, the other thugs and killers. How did you become a drüskelle,
anyway?”
“Your friends slaughtered my family in a Grisha raid,” he’d said coldly.
“Brum took me in and gave me something to fight for.”
Nina hadn’t wanted to believe that, but she knew it was possible. Battles
happened, innocent lives were lost in the cross fire. It was equally
disturbing to think of that monster Brum as some kind of father figure.
It didn’t seem right to argue or to apologise, so she said the first thing that
popped into her head.
“Jer molle pe oonet. Enel mörd je nej afva trohem verretn. ” I have been
made to protect you. Only in death will I be kept from this oath.
Matthias had stared at her in shock. “That’s the drüskelle oath to Fjerda.
How do you know those words?”
“I tried to learn as much about Fjerda as I could.”
“Why?”
She’d wavered, then said, “So I wouldn’t fear you.”
“You don’t seem afraid.”
“Are you afraid of me?” she’d asked.
“No,” he’d said, and he’d sounded almost surprised. He’d claimed before
that he didn’t fear her.
This time she believed him. She tried to remind herself that wasn’t a good
thing.
They’d walked on for a while, and then he’d asked, “What’s the first thing
you’re going to do?”
“Eat.”
“Eat what?”
“Everything. Stuffed cabbage, potato dumplings, blackcurrant cakes, blini
with lemon zest. I can’t wait to see Zoya’s face when I come walking into
the Little Palace.”
“Zoya Nazyalensky?”
Nina had stopped short. “You know her?”
“We all know of her. She’s a powerful witch.”
It had hit her then: For the drüskelle, Zoya was a little like Jarl Brum –
cruel, inhuman, the thing that waited in the dark with death in her hands.
Zoya was this boy’s monster. The thought left her uneasy.
“How did you get out of the cages?”
Nina blinked. “What?”
“On the ship. You were bound and in cages.”
“The water cup. The handle broke and the lip was jagged beneath. We used
it to cut through our bonds. Once our hands were free …” Nina trailed off
awkwardly.
Matthias’ brow lowered. “You were planning to attack us.”
“We were going to make our move that night.”
“But then the storm hit.”
“Yes.”
A Squaller and a Fabrikator had smashed a hole right through the deck, and
they’d swum free. But had any of them survived the icy waters? Had they
managed to make their way to land? She shivered.
If they hadn’t discovered the cup’s secret, she would have drowned in a
cage.
“What do drüskelle eat?” she asked, picking up her pace. “Other than
Grisha babies?”
“We don’t eat babies!”
“Dolphin blubber? Reindeer hooves?”
She saw his mouth twist and wondered if he was nauseous or if maybe,
possibly, he was trying not to laugh.
“We eat a lot of fish. Herring. Salt cod. And yes, reindeer, but not the
hooves.”
“How about cake?”
“What about it?”
“I’m very keen on cake. I’m wondering if we can find some common
ground.”
He shrugged.
“Oh, come on, drüskelle,” she said. They still hadn’t exchanged names, and
she wasn’t sure they should. Eventually, if they survived, they would reach
a town or village. She didn’t know what would happen then, but the less he
knew about her the better, in any case. “You’re not giving up Fjerdan
government secrets. I just want to know why you don’t like cake.”
“I do like cake, but we’re not permitted sweets.”
“Anyone? Or just drüskelle?”
“Drüskelle. It’s considered an indulgence. Like alcohol or—”
“Girls?”
His cheeks reddened, and he trudged forward. It was just so easy to make
him uncomfortable.
“If you’re not allowed sugar or alcohol, you’d probably really love
pomdrakon.”
He hadn’t taken the bait at first, just walked on, but finally the quiet proved
too much for him.
“What’s pomdrakon?”
“Dragonbowl,” Nina said eagerly. “First you soak raisins in brandy, and
then you turn off the lights and set them on fire.”
“Why?”
“To make it hard to grab them.”
“What do you do once you have them?”
“You eat them.”
“Don’t they burn your tongue?”
“Sure but—”
“Then why would you—”
“Because it’s fun, dummy. You know, ‘fun’? There’s a word for it in
Fjerdan so you must be familiar with the term.”
“I have plenty of fun.”
“All right, what do you do for fun?”
And that was the way they went on, sniping at each other, just like that first
night in the water, keeping each other alive, refusing to acknowledge that
they were growing weaker, that if they didn’t find a real town soon, they
weren’t going to last much longer. There were days when their hunger and
the glare off the northern ice had them moving in circles, backtracking,
faltering over their own steps, but they never spoke of it, never said the
word lost, as if they both knew that would somehow be admitting defeat.
“Why don’t Fjerdans let girls fight?” she asked him one night as they’d lain
curled beneath a lean-to, the cold palpable through the skins they’d laid on
the ground.
“They don’t want to fight.”
“How do you know? Have you ever asked one?”
“Fjerdan women are to be venerated, protected.”
“That’s probably a wise policy.”
He’d known her well enough by then to be surprised. “It is?”
“Think how embarrassing it would be for you when you got trounced by a
Fjerdan girl.”
He snorted.
“I’d love to see you get beaten by a girl,” she said happily.
“Not in this lifetime.”
“Well, I guess I won’t get to see it. I’ll just get to live the moment when I
knock you on your ass.”
This time he did laugh, a proper laugh that she could feel through her back.
“Saints, Fjerdan, I didn’t know you could laugh. Careful now, take it slow.”
“I enjoy your arrogance, drüsje.”
Now she laughed. “That may be the worst compliment I’ve received.”
“Do you never doubt yourself?”
“All the time,” she’d said as she slid into sleep. “I just don’t show it.”
The next morning, they picked their way across an ice field splintered by
jagged crevasses, keeping to the solid expanses between the deadly rifts,
and arguing about Nina’s sleeping habits.
“How can you call yourself a soldier? You’d sleep until noon if I let you.”
“What does that have to do with anything?”
“Discipline. Routine. Does it mean nothing to you? Djel, I can’t wait to
have a bed to myself again.”
“Right,” said Nina. “I can feel just how much you hate sleeping next to me.
I feel it every morning.”
Matthias flushed bright scarlet. “Why do you have to say things like that?”
“Because I like it when you turn red.”
“It’s disgusting. You don’t need to make everything lewd.”
“If you would just relax—”
“I don’t want to relax.”
“Why? What are you so afraid will happen? Afraid you might start to like
me?”
He said nothing.
Despite her fatigue, she trotted ahead of him. “That’s it, isn’t it? You don’t
want to like a Grisha.
You’re scared that if you laugh at my jokes or answer my questions, you
might start thinking I’m human. Would that be so terrible?”
“I do like you.”
“What was that?”
“I do like you,” he said angrily.
She’d beamed, feeling a well of pleasure erupt through her. “Now, really, is
that so bad?”
“Yes!” he roared.
“Why?”
“Because you’re horrible. You’re loud and lewd and … treacherous. Brum
warned us that Grisha
could be charming.”
“Oh, I see. I’m the wicked Grisha seductress. I have beguiled you with my
Grisha wiles!”
She poked him in the chest.
“Stop that.”
“No. I’m beguiling you.”
“Quit it.”
She danced around him in the snow, poking his chest, his stomach, his side.
“Goodness! You’re very solid. This is strenuous work.” He started to laugh.
“It’s working! The beguiling has begun. The Fjerdan has fallen. You are
powerless to resist me. You—”
Nina’s voice broke off in a scream as the ice gave way beneath her feet. She
threw her hands out blindly, reaching for something, anything that might
stop her fall, fingers scraping over ice and rock.
The drüskelle grabbed her arm, and she cried out as it was nearly wrenched
from its socket.
She hung there, suspended over nothing, the grip of his fingers the only
thing between her and the dark mouth of the ice. For a moment, looking
into his eyes, she was certain he was going to let go.
“Please,” she said, tears sliding over her cheeks.
He dragged her up over the edge, and slowly they crawled onto more solid
ground. They lay on
their backs, panting.
“I was afraid … I was afraid you were going to let me go,” she managed.
There was a long pause and then he said, “I thought about it. Just for a
second.”
Nina huffed out a little laugh. “It’s okay,” she said at last. “I would have
thought about it, too.”
He got to his feet and offered her his hand. “I’m Matthias.”
“Nina,” she said, taking it. “Nice to make your acquaintance.”
The shipwreck had been more than a year ago, but it felt as if no time had
passed at all. Part of Nina wanted to go back to the moment before
everything had gone wrong, to those long days on the ice when they’d
managed to be Nina and Matthias instead of Grisha and witchhunter. But
the more she thought about it, the more surely she knew there had never
been a moment like that. Those three weeks were a lie that she and Matthias
had built to survive. The truth was the pyre.
“Nina,” Matthias said, jogging up behind her now. “Nina, you need to stay
with the others.”
“Leave me alone.”
When he took her arm, she whirled and clenched her fist, cutting off the air
to his throat. An ordinary man would have released her, but Matthias was a
trained drüskelle. He seized her other arm and clamped it to her body,
bundling her tight to him so she couldn’t use her hands. “Stop,” he said
softly.
She struggled against his hold, glaring up at him. “Let me go.”
“I can’t. Not while you’re a threat.”
“I will always be a threat to you, Matthias.”
The corner of his mouth pulled up in a rueful smile. His eyes were almost
sorrowful. “I know.”
Slowly, he released her. She stepped back.
“What will I see when I get to the Ice Court?” she demanded.
“You’re frightened.”
“Yes,” she said, chin jutting up defiantly. There was no point denying it.
“Nina—”
“Tell me. I need to know. Torture chambers? A pyre blazing from a
rooftop?”
“They don’t use pyres at the Court any more.”
“Then what? Drawing and quartering? Firing squads? Does the Royal
Palace have a view of the gallows?
“I’ve had enough of your judgements, Nina. This has to stop.”
“He’s right. You can’t go on this way.” Jesper was standing in the snow
with the others. How long had they been there? Had they seen her attack
Matthias?
“Stay out of this,” Nina snapped.
“If you two keep fighting, you’re going to get us all killed, and I have a lot
more card games I need to lose.”
“You must find a way to make peace,” said Inej. “At least for a while.”
“This is not your concern,” Matthias growled.
Kaz stepped forward, his expression dangerous. “It is very much our
concern. And watch your tone.”
Matthias threw up his hands. “You’ve all been taken in by her. This is what
she does. She makes you think she’s your friend and then—”
Inej crossed her arms. “Then what?”
“Let it go, Inej.”
“No, Nina,” Matthias said. “Tell them. You said you were my friend once.
Do you remember?” He
turned to the others. “We travelled together for three weeks. I saved her life.
We saved each other.
When we got to Elling, we … I could have revealed her to the soldiers we
saw there at any time. But I didn’t.” Matthias started pacing, his voice
rising, as if the memories were getting the better of him. “I borrowed
money. I arranged lodging. I was willing to betray everything I believed in
for the sake of her safety. When I saw her down to the docks so we could
try to book passage, there was a Kerch trader there, ready to set sail.”
Matthias was there again, standing on the docks with her, she could see it in
his eyes. “Ask her what she did then, this honourable ally, this girl who
stands in judgement of me and my kind.”
No one said a word, but they were watching, waiting.
“Tell them, Nina,” he demanded. “They should know how you treat your
friends.”
Nina swallowed, then forced herself to meet their gazes. “I told the Kerch
that he was a slaver and that he’d taken me prisoner. I threw myself on their
mercy and begged them to help me. I had a seal I’d taken from a slaving
ship we’d raided near the Wandering Isle. I used it as proof.”
She couldn’t bear to look at them. Kaz knew, of course. She’d had to tell
him the charges she’d made and tried to recant when she was begging for
his assistance. But Kaz had never probed, never asked why, never chastised
her. In a way, telling Kaz had been a comfort. There could be no judgement
from a boy known as Dirtyhands.
But now the truth was there for everyone to see. Privately, the Kerch knew
slaves moved in and out of the ports of Ketterdam, and most indentures
were really slaves by another name. But publicly, they reviled it and were
obligated to prosecute all slavers. Nina had known exactly what would
happen when she’d branded Matthias with that charge.
“I didn’t understand what was happening,” said Matthias. “I didn’t speak
Kerch, but Nina certainly did. They seized me and put me in chains. They
tossed me in the brig and kept me there in the dark for weeks while we
crossed the sea. The next time I saw daylight was when they led me off the
ship in Ketterdam.”
“I had no choice,” Nina said, the ache of tears pressing at her throat. “You
don’t know—”
“Just tell me one thing,” he said. There was anger in his voice, but she
could hear something else, too, a kind of pleading. “If you could go back, if
you could undo what you did to me, would you?”
Nina made herself face them. She had her reasons, but did they matter? And
who were they to judge her? She straightened her spine, lifted her chin. She
was a member of the Dregs, an employee of the White Rose, and
occasionally a foolish girl, but before anything else she was a Grisha and a
soldier. “No,” she said clearly, her voice echoing off the endless ice. “I’d do
it all over again.”
A sudden rumble shook the ground. Nina nearly lost her footing, and she
saw Kaz brace himself
with his walking stick. They exchanged puzzled glances.
“Are there fault lines this far north?” Wylan asked.
Matthias frowned. “Not that I know of, but—”
A slab of earth shot up from beneath Matthias’ feet, knocking him to the
ground. Another erupted to Nina’s right, sending her sprawling. All around
them, crooked monoliths of earth and ice burst upwards, as if the ground
was coming to life. A harsh wind whipped at their faces, snow spinning in
flurries.
“What the hell is this?” cried Jesper.
“Some of kind of earthquake!” shouted Inej.
“No,” said Nina, pointing to a dark spot that seemed to be floating in the
sky, unaffected by the howling wind. “We’re under attack.”
Nina crawled on hands and knees, seeking some kind of shelter. She
thought she might well have lost her mind. There was someone in the air,
hovering in the sky high above her. She was watching someone fly.
Grisha Squallers could control current. She’d even seen them play at
tossing each other into the air at the Little Palace, but the level of finesse
and power it took to maintain controlled flight was unthinkable – at least it
had been, until now. Jurda parem. She hadn’t quite believed Kaz. Maybe
she’d even suspected him of outright lying to her about what he’d seen just
to get her to do the job. But unless she’d taken a blow to the head she didn’t
remember, this was real.
The Squaller turned in the air, stirring the storm into a frenzy, sending ice
flying until it stung her cheeks. She could barely see. She fell backwards as
another slab of rock and ice shot from the ground. They were being
corralled, pushed closer together to make a single target.
“I need a distraction!” shouted Jesper from somewhere in the storm.
She heard a tinny plink.
“Get down,” cried Wylan. Nina flattened her body to the snow. A boom
sounded overhead, and an explosion lit the sky just to the right of the
Squaller. The winds around them dropped as the Squaller was thrown off
course and forced to focus on righting himself. It took the briefest second,
but it was enough time for Jesper to aim his rifle and fire.
A shot rang out, and the Squaller was hurtling towards the earth. Another
slab of ice slid into place.
They were being trapped like animals in a pen, ready for the slaughter.
Jesper aimed between the slabs at a distant stand of trees, and Nina realised
there was another Grisha there, a boy with dark hair.
Before Jesper could get off a shot, the Grisha rammed a fist upwards, and
Jesper was thrown off his feet by a shaft of earth. He rolled as he fell and
fired from the ground.
The boy in the distance cried out and dropped to one knee, but his arms
were still raised, and the ground still rumbled and rocked beneath them.
Jesper fired again and missed. Nina lifted her hands and tried to focus on
the Grisha’s heart, but he was well out of her range.
She saw Inej signal to Kaz. Without a word, he positioned himself against
the nearest slab and cupped his hands at his knee. The ground buckled and
swayed, but he held steady as she launched herself from the cradle of his
fingers in a graceful arc. She vanished over the slab without a sound. A
moment later, the ground went still.
“Trust the Wraith,” said Jesper.
They stood, dazed, the air strangely hushed after the chaos that had come
before.
“Wylan,” Jesper panted, pushing to his feet. “Get us out of here.”
Wylan nodded, pulled a putty-coloured lump from his pack, and gently
placed it against the nearest rock. “Everybody down,” he instructed.
They crouched together in a cluster as far away as the enclosure would
permit. Wylan slapped his hand against the explosive and dove away,
careening into Matthias and Jesper as they all covered their ears.
Nothing happened.
“Are you kidding me?” said Jesper.
Boom. The slab exploded. Ice and bits of rock rained down over their heads.
Wylan was covered in dust and wearing a slightly dazed, deliriously happy
expression. Nina started to laugh. “Try to look like you knew it would
work.”
They stumbled out of the corral of slabs.
Kaz gestured to Jesper. “Perimeter. Let’s make sure there aren’t more
surprises.” They set off in opposite directions.
Nina and the others found Inej standing over the body of the trembling
Grisha. He wore clothes of olive drab, and his eyes were glassy. Blood
spilled from the bullet wound in his upper thigh, and a knife jutted from the
right side of his chest. Inej must have thrown it when she’d escaped from
the enclosure.
Nina kneeled beside him.
“I need a little more,” the Grisha mumbled. “Just a little more.” He grabbed
at Nina’s hand, and only then did she recognise him.
“Nestor?”
He twitched at the sound of his name, but he didn’t seem to know her.
“Nestor, it’s me, Nina.” She had been at school with him back at the Little
Palace. They’d been sent to Keramzin together during the war. At King
Nikolai’s coronation, they’d stolen a bottle of champagne and got sick by
the lake. He was a Fabrikator, one of the Durasts who worked with metal,
glass, and fibers. It didn’t make sense. Fabrikators made textiles, weapons.
He shouldn’t have been capable of what she’d just witnessed.
“Please,” he begged, his face crumpling. “I need more.”
“Parem?”
“Yes,” he sobbed. “Yes. Please.”
“I can heal your wound, Nestor, if you stay still.” He was in bad shape, but
if she could stop the bleeding …
“I don’t want your help,” he said angrily, trying to push away from her.
She tried calming him, lowering his pulse, but she was afraid of stopping
his heart. “Please, Nestor. Please be still.”
He was screaming now, fighting her.
“Hold him down,” she said.
Matthias moved to help, and Nestor threw up his arms.
The ground rose in a rippling sheet, thrusting Nina and the others back.
“Nestor, please! Let us help you.”
He stood up, staggering on his wounded leg, pulling at the knife buried in
his chest. “Where are they?” he screamed. “Where did they go?”
“Who?”
“The Shu!” he wailed. “Where did they go? Come back!” He took a
wobbling step, then another.
“Come back!” He fell face forwards into the snow. He didn’t move again.
Nina rushed to his side and turned him over. There was snow in his eyes
and his mouth. She placed her hands on his chest, trying to restore his
heartbeat, but it was no good. If he hadn’t been ravaged by the drug, he
might have survived his wounds. But his body was weak, the skin tight to
his bones and so pale it seemed transparent.
This isn’t right, Nina thought miserably. Practising the Small Science made
a Grisha healthier, stronger. It was one of the things she loved most about
her power. But the body had limits. It was as if the drug had caused Nestor
’s power to outpace his body. It had simply used him up.
Kaz and Jesper returned, panting.
“Anything?” asked Matthias.
Jesper nodded. “A party of people heading south.”
“He was calling out for the Shu,” Nina said.
“We knew the Shu would send a team to retrieve Bo Yul-Bayur,” said Kaz.
Jesper looked down at Nestor ’s motionless body. “But we didn’t know
they’d send Grisha. How can we be sure they aren’t mercenaries?”
Kaz held up a coin emblazoned with a horse on one side and two crossed
keys on the other. “This was in the Squaller ’s pocket,” he said, tossing it to
Jesper. “It’s a Shu wen ye. The Coin of Passage.
This is a government mission.”
“How did they find us?” Inej asked.
“Maybe Jesper ’s gunshots drew them,” said Kaz.
Jesper bristled and pointed at Nina and Matthias. “Or maybe they heard
these two shouting at each other. They could have been following us for
miles.”
Nina tried to make sense of what she was hearing. Shu didn’t use Grisha as
soldiers, and they weren’t like the Fjerdans; they didn’t see Grisha power as
unnatural or repulsive. They were fascinated by it. But they still viewed the
Grisha as less than human. The Shu government had been capturing and
experimenting on Grisha for years in an attempt to locate the source of their
power.
They would never use Grisha as mercenaries. Or at least that had been the
case before. Maybe parem had changed the game.
“I don’t understand,” said Nina. “If they have jurda parem, why go after Bo
Yul-Bayur?”
“It’s possible they have a stash of it, but can’t reproduce his process,” Kaz
said. “That’s what the Merchant Council seemed to think. Or maybe they
just want to make sure Yul-Bayur doesn’t give the formula to anyone else.”
“Do you think they’ll use drugged Grisha to try to break into the Ice
Court?” Inej asked.
“If they have more of them,” said Kaz. “That’s what I would do.”
Matthias shook his head. “If they’d had a Heartrender, we’d all be dead.”
“It was still a close thing,” replied Inej.
Jesper shouldered his rifle. “Wylan earned his keep.”
Wylan gave a little jump at the sound of his name. “I did?”
“Well, you made a down payment.”
“Let’s move,” said Kaz.
“We need to bury them,” Nina said.
“The ground’s too hard, and we don’t have the time. The Shu team is still
moving towards Djerholm. We don’t know how many other Grisha they
may have, and Pekka’s team could already be inside.”
“We can’t just leave them for the wolves,” she said, her throat tight.
“Do you want to build them a pyre?”
“Go to hell, Brekker.”
“Do your job, Zenik,” he shot back. “I didn’t bring you to Fjerda to perform
funeral rites.”
She lifted her hands. “How about I crack your skull open like a robin’s
egg?”
“You don’t want a look at what’s inside my head, Nina dear.”
She took a step forward, but Matthias moved in front of her.
“Stop,” he said. “I’ll do it. I’ll help you dig the grave.” Nina stared at him.
He took a pick from his gear and handed it to her, then took another from
Jesper ’s pack. “Head due south from here,” he said to the others. “I know
the terrain, and I’ll make sure we catch up to you by nightfall. We’ll move
faster on our own.”
Kaz looked at him steadily. “Just remember that pardon, Helvar.”
“Are we sure it’s a good idea to leave them alone?” Wylan asked as they
moved down the slope.
“No,” replied Inej.
“But we’re still doing it?”
“We trust them now or we trust them later,” Kaz said.
“Are we going to talk about Matthias’ little revelation about Nina’s
loyalties?” asked Jesper.
Nina could just make out Kaz’s reply: “Pretty sure most of us don’t have
‘stalwart’ or ‘true’
checked off on our résumés.” For all that she wanted to pummel Kaz, she
couldn’t help being a bit grateful, too.
Matthias walked a few steps away from Nestor ’s body. He heaved the pick
into the icy earth, wrenched it free, plunged it in again.
“Here?” Nina asked.
“Do you want him elsewhere?”
“I … I don’t know.” She gazed out at the fields of white, marked by sparse
groves of birch. “It all looks the same to me.”
“You know our gods?”
“Some,” she said.
“But you know Djel.”
“The wellspring.”
Matthias nodded. “The Fjerdans believe all the world is connected through
its waters – the seas, the ice, the rivers and streams, the rain and storms. All
feed Djel and are fed by him. When we die, we call it felöt-objer, taking
root. We become as roots of the ash tree, drinking from Djel wherever we
are laid.”
“Is that why you burn Grisha instead of burying them?”
He paused, then gave a brief nod.
“But you’ll help me lay Nestor and the Squaller to rest here?”
He nodded again.
She took hold of the other pick and attempted to match his swing. The
ground was hard and unyielding. Every time the pick struck the earth it sent
a rattling jolt up her arms.
“Nestor shouldn’t have been able to do that,” she said, her thoughts still
churning. “No Grisha can use power that way. It’s all wrong.”
He was quiet for a moment, and then he said, “Do you understand a little
better now? What it’s like to face a power so alien? To face an enemy with
such unnatural strength?”
Nina tightened her hold on the pick. Nestor in the grip of parem had seemed
like a perversion of everything she loved about her power. Was that what
Matthias and the other Fjerdans saw in Grisha?
Power beyond explanation, the natural world undone?
“Maybe.” It was the most she could offer.
“You said you had no choice at the harbour in Elling,” he said without
looking at her. His pick rose and fell, the rhythm unbroken. “Was it because
I was drüskelle? Were you planning it all along?”
Nina remembered their last real day together, the elation they’d felt when
they’d crested a steep hill and seen the port town spread out below. She’d
been shocked to hear Matthias say, “I am almost sorry, Nina.”
“Almost?”
“I’m too hungry to really be sorry.”
“At last, you succumb to my influence. But how are we going to eat without
any money?” she asked as they headed down the hill. “I may have to sell
your pretty hair to a wig shop for cash.”
“Don’t get ideas,” he’d said with a laugh. His laughter had come more
easily as they’d travelled, as if he were becoming fluent in a new language.
“If this is Elling, I should be able to find us lodging.”
She’d stopped then, the truth of their situation returning to her with terrible
clarity. She was deep in enemy territory with no allies but a drüskelle who’d
thrown her in a cage only a few weeks earlier.
But before she could speak, Matthias had said, “I owe you my life, Nina
Zenik. We will get you safely home.”
She’d been surprised at how easy it was to trust him. And he’d trusted her,
too.
Now she swung her pick, felt the impact reverberate up her arms and into
her shoulders, and said,
“There were Grisha in Elling.”
He halted midswing. “What?”
“They were spies doing reconnaissance work in the port. They saw me enter
the main square with you and recognised me from the Little Palace. One of
them recognised you, too, Matthias. He knew you from a skirmish near the
border.”
Matthias remained still.
“They waylaid me when you went to speak to the manager of the boarding
house,” Nina continued.
“I convinced them I was under cover there, too. They wanted to take you
prisoner, but I told them that you weren’t alone, that it would be too risky to
try to capture you right away. I promised I would bring you to them the next
day.”
“Why didn’t you just tell me?”
Nina tossed down her pick. “Tell you there were Grisha spies in Elling?
You might have made your peace with me, but you can’t expect me to
believe you wouldn’t have revealed them.”
He looked away, a muscle twitching in his jaw, and she knew she’d spoken
truth.
“That morning,” he said, “on the docks—”
“I had to get us both away from Elling as fast as I could. I thought if I could
just find us a vessel to stow away on … but the Grisha must have been
watching the boarding house and seen us leave. When they showed up on
the docks, I knew they were coming for you, Matthias. If they’d captured
you, you would have been taken to Ravka, interrogated, maybe executed. I
spotted the Kerch trader. You know their laws on slaving.”
“Of course I do,” he said bitterly.
“I made the charge. I begged them to save me. I knew they’d have to take
you into custody, and bring us safely to Kerch. I didn’t know – Matthias, I
didn’t know they’d throw you in Hellgate.”
His eyes were hard when he faced her, his knuckles white on the handle of
his pick. “Why didn’t you speak up? Why didn’t you tell the truth when we
arrived in Ketterdam?”
“I tried. I swear it. I tried to recant. They wouldn’t let me see a judge. They
wouldn’t let me see you.
I couldn’t explain the seal from the slaver or why I’d made the charges, not
without revealing Ravka’s intelligence operations. I would have
compromised Grisha still in the field. I would have been sentencing them to
death.”
“So you left me to rot in Hellgate.”
“I could have gone home to Ravka. Saints, I wanted to. But I stayed in
Ketterdam. I gave up my wages for bribes, petitioned the Court—”
“You did everything but tell the truth.”
She’d meant to be gentle, apologetic, to tell him that she’d thought of him
every night and every day. But the image of the pyre was still fresh in her
mind. “I was trying to protect my people, people you’ve spent your life
trying to exterminate.”
He gave a rueful laugh, turning the pick over in his hands. “Wanden
olstrum end kendesorum.”
It was the first part of a Fjerdan saying, The water hears and understands. It
sounded kind enough, but Matthias knew that Nina would be familiar with
the rest of it.
“Isen ne bejstrum,” she finished. The water hears and understands. The ice
does not forgive.
“And what will you do now, Nina? Will you betray the people you call
friends again, for the sake of the Grisha?”
“What?”
“You can’t tell me you intend to let Bo Yul-Bayur live.”
He knew her well. With every new thing she’d learned of jurda parem,
she’d been more certain that the only way to protect Grisha was to end the
scientist’s life. She thought of Nestor begging with his last breath for his
Shu masters to return. “I can’t bear the thought of my people being slaves,”
she admitted. “But we have a debt to settle, Matthias. The pardon is my
penance, and I won’t be the person who keeps you from your freedom
again.”
“I don’t want the pardon.”
She stared at him. “But—”
“Maybe your people would become slaves. Or maybe they would become
an unstoppable force. If
Yul-Bayur lives and the secret of jurda parem becomes known, anything is
possible.”
For a long moment, they held each other ’s gaze. The sun was beginning to
set, light falling in golden shafts across the snow. She could see the blond of
Matthias’ lashes peeking through the black antimony she had used to stain
them. She’d have to tailor him again soon.
In those days after the shipwreck, she and Matthias had formed an uneasy
truce. What had grown up between them had been something fiercer than
affection – an understanding that they were both soldiers, that in another
life, they might have been allies instead of enemies. She felt that now.
“It would mean betraying the others,” she said. “They won’t get their pay
from the Merchant Council.”
“True.”
“And Kaz will kill us both.”
“If he learns the truth.”
“Have you tried lying to Kaz Brekker?”
Matthias shrugged. “Then we die as we lived.”
Nina looked at Nestor ’s emaciated form. “For a cause.”
“We are of one mind in this,” said Matthias. “Bo Yul-Bayur will not leave
the Ice Court alive.”
“The deal is the deal,” she said in Kerch, the language of trade, a tongue
that belonged to neither of them.
“The deal is the deal,” he replied.
Matthias swung his pick and brought it down in a hard arc, a kind of
declaration. She hefted her pick and did the same. Without another word,
they returned to the work of the grave, falling into a determined rhythm.
Kaz was right about one thing at least. She and Matthias had finally found
something to agree on.
PART 4
THE TRICK TO FALLING
Inej felt as though she and Kaz had become twin soldiers, marching on,
pretending they were fine, hiding their wounds and bruises from the rest of
the crew.
It took two more days of travel to reach the cliffs that overlooked Djerholm,
but the going was easier as they moved south and towards the coast. The
weather warmed, the ground thawed, and she began to see signs of spring.
Inej had thought Djerholm would look like Ketterdam – a canvas of black,
grey, and brown, tangled streets dense with mist and coalsmoke, ships of
every kind in the harbour, pulsing with the rush and bustle of trade.
Djerholm’s harbour was crowded with ships, but its tidy streets marched to
the water in orderly fashion, and the houses were painted such colours –
red, blue, yellow, pink – as if in defiance of the wild white land and the long
winters this far north. Even the warehouses by the quay were wrought in
cheerful colours. It looked the way she’d imagined cities as a child,
everything candy-hued and in its proper place.
Was the Ferolind already waiting at the docks, snug in its berth, flying its
Kerch flag and the distinctive orange and green parti-colour of the
Haanraadt Bay Company? If the plan went the way Kaz hoped, tomorrow
night they would stroll down the Djerholm quay with Bo Yul-Bayur in tow,
hop on their ship, and be far out to sea before anyone in Fjerda was the
wiser. She preferred not to think of what tomorrow night might look like if
the plan went wrong.
Inej glanced up to where the Ice Court stood like a great white sentinel on a
massive cliff overlooking the harbour. Matthias had called the cliffs
unscalable, and Inej had to admit that they would present a challenge even
for the Wraith. They seemed impossibly high, and from a distance, their
white lime surface looked clean and bright as ice.
“Cannon,” said Jesper.
Kaz squinted up at the big guns pointed out at the bay. “I’ve broken into
banks, warehouses, mansions, museums, vaults, a rare book library, and
once the bedchamber of a visiting Kaelish diplomat whose wife had a
passion for emeralds. But I’ve never had a cannon shot at me.”
“There’s something to be said for novelty,” offered Jesper.
Inej pressed her lips together. “Hopefully, it won’t come to that.”
“Those guns are there to stop invading armadas,” Jesper said confidently.
“Good luck hitting a skinny little schooner cutting through the waves bound
for fortune and glory.”
“I’ll quote you on that when a cannonball lands in my lap,” said Nina.
They slipped easily into the traffic of travellers and traders where the cliff
road met the northern road that led to Upper Djerholm. The upper town was
a rambling extension of the city below, a sprawling collection of shops,
markets, and inns that served the guards and staff who worked at the Ice
Court as well as visitors. Luckily, the crowds were heavy and motley
enough that one more group of foreigners could go unnoticed, and Inej
found herself breathing a bit easier. She’d worried that she and Jesper might
be dangerously conspicuous in the Fjerdan capital’s sea of blonds. Maybe
the crew from the Shu Han was relying on the jumbled crowd for cover,
too.
Signs of Hringkälla celebrations were everywhere. The shops had created
elaborate displays of pepper cookies baked in the shape of wolves, some
hanging like ornaments from large, twisting trees, and the bridge spanning
the river gorge had been festooned with ribbons in Fjerdan silver. One way
into the Ice Court and one way out. Would they cross this bridge as visitors
tomorrow?
“What are they?” Wylan asked, pausing in front of a peddler ’s cart laden
with wreaths made of the same twisting branches and silver ribbons.
“Ash trees,” replied Matthias. “Sacred to Djel.”
“There’s supposed to be one in the middle of the White Island,” said Nina,
ignoring the warning look the Fjerdan cast her. “It’s where the drüskelle
gather for the listening ceremony.”
Kaz tapped his walking stick on the ground. “Why is this the first I’m
hearing of it?”
“The ash is sustained by the spirit of Djel,” said Matthias. “It’s where we
may best hear his voice.”
Kaz’s eyes flickered. “Not what I asked. Why isn’t it on our plans?”
“Because it’s the holiest place in all of Fjerda and not essential to our
mission.”
“I say what’s essential. Anything else you decided to leave out in your great
wisdom?”
“The Ice Court is a vast structure,” Matthias said, turning away. “I can’t
label every crack and corner.”
“Then let’s hope nothing is lurking in those corners,” Kaz replied.
Upper Djerholm had no real centre, but the bulk of its taverns, inns, and
market stalls were clustered around the base of the hill leading to the Ice
Court. Kaz steered them seemingly aimlessly through the streets until he
found a run-down tavern called the Gestinge.
“Here?” Jesper complained, peering into the dank main room. The whole
place stank of garlic and fish.
Kaz just gave a significant glance upwards and said, “Terrace.”
“What’s a gestinge?” Inej wondered aloud.
“It means ‘paradise’,” said Matthias. Even he looked skeptical.
Nina helped secure them a table on the tavern’s rooftop terrace. It was
mostly empty, the weather still too cold to attract many patrons. Or maybe
they’d been scared away by the food – herring in rancid oil, stale black
bread, and some kind of butter that looked distinctly mossy.
Jesper looked down at his plate and moaned. “Kaz, if you want me dead, I
prefer a bullet to poison.”
Nina scrunched her nose. “When I don’t want to eat, you know there’s a
problem.”
“We’re here for the view, not the food.”
From their table, they had a clear, if distant, view of the Ice Court’s outer
gate and the first guardhouse. It was built into a white arch formed by two
monumental stone wolves on their hind legs, and spanned the road leading
up the hill to the Court. Inej and the others watched the traffic come and go
through the gates as they picked at their lunches, waiting for a sign of the
prison wagons. Inej’s appetite had finally returned, and she’d been eating as
much as possible to build her strength, but the skin atop the soup she’d
ordered wasn’t helping.
There was no coffee to be had so they ordered tea and little glasses of clear
brännvin that burned going down but helped to keep them warm as a wind
picked up, stirring the silvery ribbons tied to the ash boughs lining the street
below.
“We’re going to start looking conspicuous soon,” said Nina. “This isn’t the
kind of place people like to linger.”
“Maybe they don’t have anyone to take to jail,” suggested Wylan.
“There’s always someone to take to jail,” Kaz replied, then bobbed his chin
towards the road.
“Look.”
A boxy wagon was rolling to a stop at the guardhouse. Its roof and high
sides were covered in black canvas, and it was drawn by four stout horses.
The door at the back was heavy iron, bolted and padlocked.
Kaz reached into his coat pocket. “Here,” he said and handed Jesper a
slender book with an elaborate cover.
“Are we going to read to each other?”
“Just flip it open to the back.”
Jesper opened the book and peered at the last page, puzzled. “So?”
“Hold it up so we don’t have to look at your ugly face.”
“My face has character. Besides – oh!”
“An excellent read, isn’t it?”
“Who knew I had a taste for literature?”
Jesper passed it to Wylan, who took it tentatively. “What does it say?”
“Just look,” said Jesper.
Wylan frowned and held it up, then he grinned. “Where did you get this?”
Matthias had his turn and released a surprised grunt.
“It’s called a backless book,” said Kaz as Inej took the volume from Nina
and held it up. The pages were full of ordinary sermons, but the ornate back
cover hid two lenses that acted as a long glass. Kaz had told her to keep an
eye out for women using similarly made mirrored compacts at the Crow
Club.
They could read the hand a player was holding from across the room, then
signal to a partner at the table.
“Clever,” Inej remarked as she peered through. To the barmaid and the
other patrons on the terrace, it looked as if they were handing a book
around, discussing some interesting passage. Instead Inej had a close view
of the gatehouse and the wagon parked in front of it.
The gate between the rampant wolves was wrought iron, bearing the
symbol of the sacred ash and bordered by a high, spiked fence that circled
the Ice Court’s grounds.
“Four guards,” she noted, just as Matthias had said. Two were stationed on
each side of the gatehouse, and one of them was chatting with the driver of
the prison wagon, who handed him a packet of documents.
“They’re the first line of defence,” said Matthias. “They’ll check paperwork
and confirm identities, flag anyone they think requires closer scrutiny. By
this time tomorrow the line going through the gates will be full of
Hringkälla guests and backed up all the way to the gorge.”
“By then we’ll be inside,” Kaz said.
“How often do the wagons run?” asked Jesper.
“It depends,” said Matthias. “Usually in the morning. Sometimes in the
afternoon. But I can’t imagine they’ll want prisoners arriving at the same
time as guests.”
“Then we have to be on the early wagon,” Kaz said.
Inej lifted the backless book again. The wagon driver wore a grey uniform
similar to the ones worn by the guards at the gate but absent any sash or
decoration. He swung down from his seat and came around to unlock the
iron door.
“Saints,” Inej said as the door swung open. Ten prisoners were seated along
benches that ran the wagon’s length, their wrists and feet shackled, black
sacks over their heads.
Inej handed the book back to Matthias, and as it made the rounds, Inej felt
the group’s apprehension rise. Only Kaz seemed unfazed.
“Hooded, chained, and shackled?” said Jesper. “You’re sure we can’t go in
as entertainers? I hear Wylan really kills it on the flute.”
“We go in as we are,” said Kaz, “as criminals.”
Nina peered through the lenses of the book. “They’re doing a head count.”
Matthias nodded. “If procedure hasn’t changed, they’ll do a quick head
count at the first checkpoint, then a second count at the next checkpoint,
where they’ll search the interior and undercarriage for any contraband.”
Nina passed the book to Inej. “The driver is going to notice six more
prisoners when he opens the door.”
“If only I’d thought of that,” Kaz said drily. “I can tell you’ve never picked
a pocket.”
“And I can tell you’ve never given enough thought to your haircut.”
Kaz frowned and ran a self-conscious hand along the side of his head.
“There’s nothing wrong with my haircut that can’t be fixed by four million
kruge.”
Jesper cocked his head to one side, grey eyes alight. “We’re going to use a
bunk biscuit, aren’t we?”
“Exactly.”
“I don’t know that word, bunkbiscuit,” said Matthias, running the syllables
together.
Nina gave Kaz a sour look. “Neither do I. We’re not as streetwise as you,
Dirtyhands.”
“Nor will you ever be,” Kaz said easily. “Remember our friend Mark?”
Wylan winced. “Let’s say
the mark is a tourist walking through the Barrel. He’s heard it’s a good
place to get rolled, so he keeps patting his wallet, making sure it’s there,
congratulating himself on just how alert and cautious he’s being. No fool
he. Of course every time he pats his back pocket or the front of his coat,
what is he doing? He’s telling every thief on the Stave exactly where he
keeps his scrub.”
“Saints,” grumbled Nina. “I’ve probably done that.”
“Everyone does,” said Inej.
Jesper lifted a brow. “Not everyone.”
“That’s only because you never have anything in your wallet,” Nina shot
back.
“Mean.”
“Factual.”
“Facts are for the unimaginative,” Jesper said with a dismissive wave.
“Now, a bad thief,” continued Kaz, “one who doesn’t know his way around,
just makes the grab and tries to run for it. Good way to get pinched by the
stadwatch. But a proper thief – like myself –
nabs the wallet and puts something else in its place.”
“A biscuit?”
“Bunk biscuit is just a name. It can be a rock, a bar of soap, even an old roll
if it’s the right size. A proper thief can tell the weight of a wallet just by the
way it changes the hang of a man’s coat. He makes the switch, and the poor
mark keeps tapping his pocket, happy as can be. It’s not until he tries to pay
for an omelette or lay his stake at a table that he realises he’s been done for
a sucker. By then the thief is somewhere safe, counting up his scrub.”
Wylan shifted unhappily in his chair. “Duping innocent people isn’t
something to be proud of.”
“It is if you do it well.” Kaz gave a nod to the prison wagon, now rumbling
its way up the road towards the Ice Court and the second checkpoint.
“We’re going to be the biscuit.”
“Hold on,” said Nina. “The door locks on the outside. How do we get in
and get the door locked again?”
“That’s only a problem if you don’t know a proper thief. Leave the locks to
me.”
Jesper stretched out his long legs. “So we have to unlock, unchain, and
incapacitate six prisoners, take their places, and somehow get the wagon
sealed tight again without the guards or the other prisoners being the
wiser?”
“That’s right.”
“Any other impossible feats you’d like us to accomplish?”
The barest smile flickered over Kaz’s lips. “I’ll make you a list.”
Proper thievery aside, Inej would have liked a proper night’s sleep in a
proper bed, but there would be no comfortable stay at an inn, not if they
were going to find their way onto a prison wagon and into the Ice Court
before Hringkälla began. There was too much to do.
Nina was sent out to chat up the locals and try to discover the best place to
lay their ambush for the wagon. After the horrors of Gestinge’s herring,
they’d demanded Kaz provide something edible, and were waiting for Nina
in a crowded bakery, nursing hot cups of coffee mixed with chocolate, the
wreckage of demolished rolls and cookies spread over their table in little
piles of buttery crumbs. Inej noted that Matthias’ mug sat untouched before
him, slowly cooling as he stared out the window.
“This must be hard for you,” she said quietly. “To be here but not really be
home.”
He looked down at his cup. “You have no idea.”
“I think I do. I haven’t seen my home in a long time.”
Kaz turned away and began chatting with Jesper. He seemed to do that
whenever she mentioned going back to Ravka. Of course, Inej couldn’t be
certain she’d find her parents there. Suli were travellers. For them, ‘home’
really just meant family.
“Are you worried about Nina being out there?” Inej asked.
“No.”
“She’s very good at this, you know. She’s a natural actress.”
“I’m aware,” he said grimly. “She can be anything to anyone.”
“She’s best when she’s Nina.”
“And who is that?”
“I suspect you know better than any of us.”
He crossed his huge arms. “She’s brave,” he said grudgingly.
“And funny.”
“Foolish. Every last thing needn’t be a joke.”
“Bold,” Inej said.
“Loud.”
“So why do your eyes keep searching the crowd for her?”
“They do not,” Matthias protested. She had to laugh at the ferocity of his
scowl. He drew a finger through a pile of crumbs. “Nina is everything you
say. It’s too much.”
“Mmm,” Inej murmured, taking a sip from her mug. “Maybe you’re just not
enough.”
Before he could reply, the bell on the bakery door jingled, and Nina sailed
inside, cheeks rosy, brown hair in a gorgeous tangle, and declared,
“Someone needs to start feeding me sweet rolls immediately.”
For all Matthias’ grumbling, Inej didn’t think she imagined the relief on his
face.
It had taken Nina less than an hour to discover that most of the prison
wagons passed by a roadhouse known as the Warden’s Waystation on the
route to the Ice Court. Inej and the others had to trek almost two miles out
of Upper Djerholm to locate the tavern. It was too crowded with farmers
and local labourers to be useful, so they headed further up the road, and by
the time they found a spot with enough cover and a stand of trees large
enough to suit their purpose, Inej felt close to collapse. She thanked her
Saints for Jesper ’s seemingly limitless energy. He cheerfully volunteered to
continue on and be the lookout. When the prison cart rolled by, he’d signal
the rest of the crew with a flare, then sprint back to join them.
Nina took a few minutes to tailor Jesper ’s forearm, hiding the Dregs’ tattoo
and leaving a blotchy patch of skin over it. She would see to Kaz’s tattoos
and her own that night. It was possible no one at the prison would recognise
Ketterdam gang or brothel markings, but there was no reason to take the
chance.
“No mourners,” Jesper called as he loped off into the twilight, long legs
eating up the distance easily.
“No funerals,” they replied. Inej sent a real prayer along with him, too. She
knew Jesper was well armed and could take care of himself, but between
his lanky frame and Zemeni skin, he was just too noticeable for comfort.
They camped in a dry gully bordered by a tangle of shrubs, and took shifts
dozing on the hard rock ground and keeping watch. Despite her fatigue, Inej
hadn’t thought she would be able to sleep, but the next thing she knew, the
sun was high above them, a bright pocket of glare in an overcast sky.
It had to be past noon. Nina was beside her with a piece of one of the
pepper wolf cookies she’d bought in Upper Djerholm. Inej saw that
someone had made a low fire, and the sticky remnants of a block of melted
paraffin were visible in its ashes.
“Where are the others?” she asked, looking around the empty gully.
“In the road. Kaz said we should let you sleep.”
Inej rubbed her eyes. She supposed it was a concession to her injuries.
Maybe she hadn’t hidden her exhaustion well at all. A sudden, crackling
snap snap snap from the road had her on her feet with knives drawn in
seconds.
“Easy,” Nina said. “It’s just Wylan.”
Jesper must have already raised the signal. Inej took the cookie from Nina
and hurried up to where Kaz and Matthias were watching Wylan fuss with
something at the base of a thick red fir. Another series of pops sounded, and
tiny puffs of white smoke burst from the tree’s trunk where it met the
ground. For a moment it looked as if nothing would happen, then the roots
loosed themselves from the soil, curling and withering.
“What was that?” asked Inej.
“Salt concentrate,” said Nina.
Inej cocked her head to the side. “Is Matthias … praying?”
“Saying a blessing. Fjerdans do it whenever they cut down a tree.”
“Every time?”
“The blessings depend on how you intend to use the wood. One for houses,
one for bridges.” She paused. “One for kindling.”
It took less than a minute for them to pull the tree down so that its trunk lay
blocking the road. With the roots intact, it looked as if it had simply been
felled by disease.
“Once the wagon stops, the tree will buy us about fifteen minutes and not
much more,” Kaz said.
“Move quickly. The prisoners should be hooded, but they’ll be able to hear,
so not a word. We can’t afford to arouse suspicion. For all they know, this is
a routine stop, and we want to keep it that way.”
As Inej waited in the gully with the others, she considered all the things that
might go wrong. The prisoners might not be wearing hoods. The guards
might have one of their own in the back of the wagon. And if their crew
succeeded? Well, then they’d be captives on their way into the Ice Court.
That didn’t seem like a particularly promising outcome, either.
Just when she started to wonder if Jesper had been wrong and sent up the
flare too early, a prison wagon rumbled into view. It rolled past them, then
came to a halt in front of the tree. She could hear the driver cursing to his
companion.
They both slid down from the box seat and made their way over to the tree.
For a long minute, they stood there staring at it. The larger guard took off
his hat and scratched his belly.
“How lazy can they be?” Kaz muttered.
Finally, they seemed to accept that the tree wasn’t going to move on its
own. They strolled back to the wagon to retrieve a heavy coil of rope and
unhitched one of the horses to help drag the tree out of the road.
“Be ready,” Kaz said. He skittered over the top of the gully to the back end
of the cart. He’d left his walking stick behind in the ditch, and whatever
pain he might have been feeling, he disguised it well.
He slipped his lockpicks from the lining of his coat and cradled the padlock
gently, almost lovingly.
In seconds, it sprang open, and he shoved the bolt to the side. He glanced
around to where the men were tying ropes around the tree and then opened
the door.
Inej tensed, waiting for the signal. It didn’t come. Kaz was just standing
there, staring into the wagon.
“What’s happening?” whispered Wylan.
“Maybe they aren’t hooded?” she replied. From the side, she couldn’t see.
“I’ll go.” They couldn’t all bunch up around the back of the cart at once.
Inej climbed out of the gully and came up behind Kaz. He was still standing
there, perfectly still.
She touched his shoulder briefly, and he flinched. Kaz Brekker flinched.
What was going on? She couldn’t ask him and risk giving anything away to
the listening prisoners. She peered into the wagon.
The prisoners were all cuffed and had black sacks over their heads. But
there were considerably more of them than in the wagon they’d seen at the
checkpoint. Instead of being seated and chained to the benches at the sides,
they were standing, pressed up against one another. Their feet and hands
had been shackled, and they all wore iron collars that had been clipped to
hooks in the wagon’s roof.
Whenever one started to slump or lean too heavily, his or her breath would
be cut off. It wasn’t pretty, though they were so tightly packed together it
didn’t look like anyone could actually fall and choke.
Inej gave Kaz another little nudge. His face was pale, almost waxen, but at
least this time he didn’t just stand there. He pushed himself up into the
wagon, his movements jerky and awkward, and began unlocking the
prisoners’ collars.
Inej signalled to Matthias, who leaped out of the gully to join them.
“What’s happening?” one of the prisoners asked in Ravkan, his voice
frightened.
“Tig! ” Matthias growled harshly in Fjerdan. A rustle went through the
prisoners in the truck, as if they were all coming to attention. Without
meaning to, Inej had straightened her spine, too. With that word, Matthias’
whole demeanour had changed, as if with a single sharp command he’d
stepped back into the uniform of a drüskelle. Inej eyed him nervously.
She’d started to feel comfortable with Matthias. An easy habit to fall into,
but unwise.
Kaz unlocked six sets of hand and foot shackles. One by one, Inej and
Matthias unloaded the six prisoners closest to the door. There wasn’t time to
consider height or build or even if they’d freed men or women. They led
them to the edge of the gully, all while keeping an eye on the progress of
the guards on the road. “What’s happening?” one of the captives dared to
ask. But another quick “Tig! ”
from Matthias silenced him.
Once they were out of view, Nina dropped their pulses, sending them into
unconsciousness. Only then did Wylan remove the prisoners’ hoods: four
men, one of them quite old, a middle-aged woman, and a Shu boy. It
definitely wasn’t ideal, but hopefully the guards wouldn’t fret too much
over accuracy. After all, how much trouble could a group of chained and
shackled convicts be?
Nina injected the prisoners with a sleeping solution to prolong their rest,
and Wylan helped roll them into the gully behind the trees.
“Are we just going to leave them there?” Wylan whispered to Inej as they
hurried back to the wagon with the prisoners’ hoods in hand.
Inej’s eyes were trained on the guards moving the tree, and she didn’t look
at him when she said,
“They’ll wake soon enough and make a run for it. They might even get to
the coast and freedom.
We’re doing them a favour.”
“It doesn’t look like a favour. It looks like leaving them in a ditch.”
“Quiet,” she ordered. This wasn’t the time or the place for moral quibbling.
If Wylan didn’t know the difference between being in chains and out of
them, he was about to find out.
Inej cupped her hand to her mouth and gave a low, soft bird call. They had
four, maybe five minutes left before the guards cleared the road.
Thankfully, the guards were raising quite a noise shouting encouragement at
the horse and yelling to one another.
Matthias locked Wylan into place first, then Nina. Inej saw him stiffen as
Nina lifted her hair to accept the collar, revealing the white curve of her
neck. As he fastened it around her throat, Nina met his eyes over her
shoulder, and the look they exchanged could have melted miles of northern
ice.
Matthias moved away hurriedly. Inej almost laughed. So that was all it took
to send the drüskelle scurrying and bring the boy back.
Jesper was next, panting from his run back to the crossroads. He winked at
her as she placed the sack over his head. They could hear the guards calling
back and forth.
Inej locked Matthias’ collar and stood on tiptoe to place the hood on his
head. But when she moved to pull Nina’s hood down, the Grisha fluttered
her eyes rapidly, bobbing her head towards the wagon door. She still wanted
to know how Kaz was going to lock them in.
“Watch,” Inej mouthed.
Kaz signalled to Inej, and she leaped down. She shut the wagon door,
fastened the padlock, and slid the bolt home. A second later the opposite
side of the door pushed open. Kaz had simply removed the hinges. It was a
trick they’d used plenty of times when a lock was too complicated to pick
quickly or they wanted to make a theft look like an inside job. Ideal for
faking suicides, Kaz had once told her, and she’d never been sure if he was
sincere.
Inej took a last look at the road. The men had finished with the tree. The big
one was dusting off his hands and slapping the horse’s back. The other was
already approaching the front of the wagon.
Inej gripped the lip of the door and swung herself up, squeezing inside.
Immediately, Kaz started replacing the hinges. Inej shoved a hood over
Nina’s surprised face, then took her place beside Jesper.
But even in the dim light, she could tell Kaz was moving too slowly, his
gloved fingers clumsier than she’d ever seen them. What was wrong with
him? And why had he frozen at the wagon door?
Something had made him hesitate, but what?
She heard the ping of metal as Kaz dropped one of the screws. She peered
at the wagon floor and kicked it back to him, trying to ignore the pounding
of her heart.
Kaz crouched down to replace the second hinge. He was breathing hard.
She knew he was working
in low light, by touch alone, in those cursed leather gloves he always
insisted on wearing, but Inej didn’t think that was why he seemed so
agitated. She heard footsteps on the right side of the wagon, one guard
shouting to another. Come on, Kaz. She hadn’t taken the time to sweep
away their footprints. What if the guard noticed? What if he pulled on the
door, and it simply fell off its hinges, revealing Kaz Brekker, unhooded and
unchained?
She heard another ping. Kaz cursed once under his breath. Suddenly, the
door shook as the guard gave the chained padlock a rattle. Kaz braced his
hand against the hinge. The crack of light beneath the door widened. Inej
sucked in a breath.
The hinges held.
Another shout in Fjerdan, more footsteps. Then the crack of the reins and
the cart surged forward, rumbling over the road. Inej let herself exhale. Her
throat had gone completely dry.
Kaz took his place beside her. He shoved a hood over her head, and the
musty smell filled her nostrils. He would put his own hood on next, then
lock himself in. Easy enough, a cheap magician’s trick, and Kaz knew them
all. His arm pressed along hers from shoulder to elbow as he locked the
collar around his neck. Bodies shifted against Inej’s back and side,
crowding up against her.
For now they were safe. But despite the rattle of the wagon’s wheels, Inej
could tell Kaz’s breathing had got worse – shallow, rapid pants like an
animal caught in a trap. It was a sound she’d never thought to hear from
him.
It was because she was listening so closely that she knew the exact moment
when Kaz Brekker, Dirtyhands, the bastard of the Barrel and the deadliest
boy in Ketterdam, fainted.
The money Mister Hertzoon had left with Kaz and Jordie ran out the
following week. Jordie tried to return his new coat, but the shop wouldn’t
take it, and Kaz’s boots had clearly been worn.
When they brought the loan agreement Mister Hertzoon had signed to the
bank, they found that –
for all its official-looking seals – it was worthless paper. No one knew of
Mister Hertzoon or his business partner.
They were evicted from the boarding house two days later, and had to find a
bridge to sleep under, but were soon rousted by the stadwatch. After that,
they wandered aimlessly until morning. Jordie insisted that they go back to
the coffeehouse. They sat for a long time in the park across the street.
When night came, and the watch began its rounds, Kaz and Jordie headed
south, into the streets of the lower Barrel, where the police did not bother to
patrol.
They slept beneath a set of stairs in an alley behind a tavern, tucked
between a discarded stove and bags of kitchen refuse. No one bothered
them that night, but the next they were discovered by a gang of boys who
told them they were in Razorgull territory. They gave Jordie a thrashing and
knocked Kaz into the canal, but not before they took his boots.
Jordie fished Kaz out of the water and gave him his dry coat.
“I’m hungry,” Kaz said.
“I’m not,” Jordie replied. And for some reason that had struck Kaz as
funny, and they’d both started laughing. Jordie wrapped his arms around
Kaz and said, “The city is winning so far. But you’ll see who wins in the
end.”
The next morning, Jordie woke with a fever.
In years to come people would call the outbreak of firepox that struck
Ketterdam the Queen’s Lady Plague, after the ship believed to have brought
the contagion to the city. It hit the crowded slums of the Barrel hardest.
Bodies piled up in the streets, and sickboats moved through the canals,
using long shovels and hooks to tumble corpses onto their platforms and
haul them out to the Reaper ’s Barge for burning.
Kaz’s fever came on two days after Jordie’s. They had no money for
medicine or a medik, so they huddled together in a pile of broken-up
wooden boxes that they dubbed the Nest.
No one came to roust them. The gangs had all been laid low by disease.
When the fever reached full fire, Kaz dreamed he had returned to the farm,
and when he knocked on the door, he saw Dream Jordie and Dream Kaz
already there, sitting at the kitchen table. They peered at him through the
window, but they wouldn’t let him in, so he wandered through the meadow,
afraid to lie down in the tall grass.
When he woke, he couldn’t smell hay or clover or apples, only coalsmoke,
and the spongy rotting vegetable stink of garbage. Jordie was lying next to
him, staring at the sky. “Don’t leave me,” Kaz wanted to say, but he was too
tired. So he laid his head on Jordie’s chest. It felt wrong already, cold and
hard.
He thought he was dreaming when the bodymen rolled him onto the
sickboat. He felt himself falling, and then he was caught in a tangle of
bodies. He tried to scream, but he was too weak. They were everywhere,
legs and arms and stiff bellies, rotting limbs and blue-lipped faces covered
in firepox sores. He floated in and out of consciousness, unsure of what was
real or fever dream as the flatboat moved out to sea. When they tumbled
him into the shallows of the Reaper ’s Barge, he somehow found the
strength to cry out.
“I’m alive,” he shouted, as loud as he could. But he was so small, and the
boat was already drifting back to harbour.
Kaz tried to pull Jordie from the water. His body was covered in the little
blooming sores that gave the firepox its name, his skin white and bruised.
Kaz thought of the little wind-up dog, of drinking hot chocolate on the
bridge. He thought that heaven would look like the kitchen of the house on
Zelverstraat and smell like hutspot cooking in the Hertzoons’ oven. He still
had Saskia’s red ribbon.
He could give it back to her. They would make candies out of quince paste.
Margit would play the piano, and he could fall asleep by the fire. He closed
his eyes and waited to die.
Kaz expected to wake in the next world, warm and safe, his belly full,
Jordie beside him. Instead, he woke surrounded by corpses. He was lying in
the shallows of the Reaper ’s Barge, his clothes soaked through, skin
wrinkled from the damp. Jordie’s body was beside him, barely recognisable,
white and swollen with rot, floating on the surface like some kind of
gruesome deep sea fish.
Kaz’s vision had cleared, and the rash had receded. His fever had broken.
He’d forgotten his hunger, but he was thirsty enough that he thought he
would go mad.
All that day and night, he waited in the pile of bodies, looking out at the
harbour, hoping the flatboat would return. They had to come to set the fires
that would burn the corpses, but when? Did the bodymen collect every day?
Every other day? He was weak and dehydrated. He knew he wouldn’t last
much longer. The coast seemed so far away, and he knew he was too weak
to swim the distance. He had survived the fever, but he might well die out
here on the Reaper ’s Barge. Did he care? There was nothing waiting for
him in the city except more hunger and dark alleys and the damp of the
canals.
Even as he thought it, he knew it wasn’t true. Vengeance was waiting,
vengeance for Jordie and maybe for himself, too. But he would have to go
to meet it.
When night came, and the tide changed direction, Kaz forced himself to lay
hands on Jordie’s body. He was too frail to swim on his own, but with
Jordie’s help, he could float. He held tight to his brother and kicked towards
the lights of Ketterdam. Together, they drifted, Jordie’s distended body
acting as a raft. Kaz kept kicking, trying not to think of his brother, of the
taut, bloated feel of Jordie’s flesh beneath his hands; he tried not to think of
anything but the rhythm of his legs moving through the sea. He’d heard
there were sharks in these waters, but he knew they wouldn’t touch him. He
was a monster now, too.
He kept kicking, and when dawn came, he looked up to find himself at the
east end of the Lid. The harbour was nearly deserted; the plague had caused
shipping in and out of Kerch to grind to a halt.
The last hundred yards were hard. The tide had turned once more, and it
was working against him.
But Kaz had hope now, hope and fury, twin flames burning inside him.
They guided him to the dock
and up the ladder. When he reached the top, he flopped down on his back
on the wooden slats, then forced himself to roll over. Jordie’s body was
caught in the current, bumping against the pylon below.
His eyes were still open, and for a moment, Kaz thought his brother was
staring back at him. But Jordie didn’t speak, he didn’t blink, his gaze didn’t
shift as the tide dragged him free of the pylon and began to carry him out to
sea.
I should close his eyes, thought Kaz. But he knew if he climbed down the
ladder and waded back into the sea, he would never find his way out again.
He’d simply let himself drown, and that wasn’t possible any more. He had
to live. Someone had to pay.
In the prison wagon, Kaz woke to a sharp jab against his thigh. He was ice
cold and in darkness. There were bodies all around him, pressing against his
back, his sides. He was drowning in corpses.
“Kaz.” A whisper.
He shuddered.
Another jab to his thigh.
“Kaz.” Inej’s voice. He managed a deep breath through his nose. He felt her
pull away from him.
Somehow, in the cramped confines of the wagon, she managed to give him
space. His heart was pounding.
“Keep talking,” he rasped.
“What?”
“Just keep talking.”
“We’re passing through the prison gate. We made it past the first two
checkpoints.”
That brought him fully to his senses. They’d gone through two checkpoints.
That meant they’d been counted. Someone had opened that door – not once
but twice – maybe even laid hands on him, and he hadn’t woken. He could
have been robbed, killed. He’d imagined his death a thousand ways, but
never sleeping through it.
He forced himself to breathe deeply, despite the smell of bodies. He’d kept
his gloves on, something the guards might have easily taken note of, and a
frustrating concession to his weakness, but if he hadn’t, he felt fairly sure
he’d have gone completely mad.
Behind him, he could hear the other prisoners murmuring to one another in
different languages.
Despite the fears the darkness woke in him, he gave thanks for it. He could
only hope that the rest of his crew, hooded and burdened by their own
anxiety, hadn’t noticed anything strange about his behaviour. He’d been
sluggish, slow to react when they’d ambushed the wagon, but that was all,
and he could make up some excuse to account for it.
He hated that Inej had seen him this way, that anyone had, but on the heels
of that thought came another: Better it should be her. In his bones, he knew
that she would never speak of it to anyone, that she would never use this
knowledge against him. She relied on his reputation. She wouldn’t want
him to look weak. But there was more to it than that, wasn’t there? Inej
would never betray him. He knew it. Kaz felt ill. Though he’d trusted her
with his life countless times, it felt much more frightening to trust her with
this shame.
The wagon came to a halt. The bolt slid back, and the doors flew open.
He heard Fjerdan being spoken, then scraping noises and a thunk. His collar
was unlocked, and he was led from the wagon down some kind of ramp
with the other prisoners. He heard what sounded
like a gate creaking open, and they were herded forward, shuffling along in
their shackles.
He squinted as his hood was suddenly yanked free. They were standing in a
large courtyard. The massive gate set into the ringwall was already being
lowered closed, and it struck the stones with an ominous series of clanks
and groans. When Kaz looked up, he saw guards stationed all along the roof
of the courtyard, rifles aimed down at the prisoners. The guards below were
moving along the rows of shackled captives, trying to match them to the
driver ’s paperwork by name or description.
Matthias had described the layout of the Ice Court in detail, but he’d said
little about the way it actually looked. Kaz had expected something old and
damp – grim grey stone, battle-hard. Instead, he was surrounded by marble
so white it almost glowed blue. He felt as if he’d wandered into some
dream-like version of the harsh lands they’d travelled in the north. It was
impossible to tell what might be glass or ice or stone.
“If this isn’t Fabrikator craft, then I’m the queen of the woodsprites,”
muttered Nina in Kerch.
“Tig! ” one of the guards commanded. He slammed his rifle into her gut,
and she doubled over in pain. Matthias kept his head turned, but Kaz didn’t
miss the tension in his frame.
The Fjerdan guards were gesturing over their papers, trying to make the
numbers and identities of the prisoners match up to the group before them.
This was the first real moment of exposure, one Kaz would have no control
over. It would have been too time-consuming and dangerous to pick and
choose the prisoners they’d replaced. It was a calculated risk, but now Kaz
could only wait and hope that laziness and bureaucracy would do the rest.
As the guards moved down the line, Inej helped Nina to her feet.
“You okay?” Inej asked, and Kaz felt himself drawn towards her voice like
water rolling downhill.
Slowly, Nina unbent herself and stood upright. “I’m fine,” she whispered.
“But I don’t think we have to worry about Pekka Rollins’ team any more.”
Kaz tracked Nina’s gaze to the top of the ringwall, high above the
courtyard, where five men had been impaled on spikes like meat skewered
for roasting, backs bent, limbs dangling. Kaz had to squint, but he
recognised Eroll Aerts, Rollins’ best lockpick and safecracker. The bruises
and welts from the beating they’d given him before his death were deep
purple in the morning light, and Kaz could just make out a black mark on
his arm – Aerts’ Dime Lion tattoo.
He scanned the other faces – some were too swollen and distorted in death
to identify. Could one of them be Rollins? Kaz knew he should be glad
another team had been taken out, but Rollins was no fool, and the thought
that his crew hadn’t made it past the Ice Court gates was more than a little
nerve-racking. Besides, if Rollins had met his death at the end of a Fjerdan
pike … No, Kaz refused that possibility. Pekka Rollins belonged to him.
The guards were arguing with the wagon driver now, and one of them was
pointing at Inej.
“What’s happening?” he whispered to Nina.
“They’re claiming the papers are out of order, that they have a Suli girl
instead of a Shu boy.”
“And the driver?” asked Inej.
“He just keeps telling them it’s not his problem.”
“That’s the way,” Kaz murmured encouragingly.
Kaz watched them go back and forth. That was the beauty of all these failsafes and layers of security. The guards always thought they could rely on
someone else to catch a mistake or fix a problem. Laziness wasn’t as
reliable as greed, but it still made a fine lever. And they were talking about
prisoners – chained, surrounded on all sides, and about to be dumped into
cells. Harmless.
Finally, one of the prison guards sighed and signalled to his cohorts.
“Diveskemen.”
“Go on,” Nina translated, and then continued as the guard spoke. “Take
them to the east block and let the next shift sort them out.”
Kaz allowed himself the briefest sigh of relief.
As anticipated, guards split the group into men and women, then led both
rows, chains jangling, through a nearly round archway fashioned in the
shape of a wolf’s open mouth.
They entered a chamber where an old woman sat with her hands chained,
flanked by guards. Her
eyes were vacant. As each prisoner approached, the woman gripped his or
her wrist.
A human amplifier. Kaz knew Nina had worked with them when she’d been
scouring the Wandering Isle for Grisha to join the Second Army. They
could sense Grisha power by touch, and he’d seen them hired on at high
stakes card games to make sure none of the players were Grisha. Someone
who could tamper with another player ’s pulse or even raise the temperature
in a room had an unfair advantage. But the Fjerdans used them for a
different purpose – to make sure no Grisha breached their walls without
being identified.
Kaz watched Nina approach. He could see her trembling as she held out her
arm. The woman clamped her fingers around Nina’s wrist. Her eyelids
stuttered briefly. Then she dropped Nina’s hand and waved her along.
Had she known and not cared? Or had the paraffin they’d used to encase
Nina’s forearms worked?
As they were led through an arch on the left, Kaz glimpsed Inej
disappearing into the opposite arch with the other female prisoners. He felt
a twinge in his chest, and with a disturbing jolt, he realised it was panic.
She’d been the one to wake him from his stupor in the cart. Her voice had
brought him back from the dark; it had been the tether he gripped and used
to drag himself back to some semblance of sanity.
The male prisoners were led clanking up a dark flight of stairs to a metal
walkway. On their left was the smooth white bulk of the ringwall. To their
right the walkway overlooked a vast glass enclosure, nearly a quarter mile
long and tall enough to comfortably fit a trading ship. It was lit by a huge
iron lantern that hung from the ceiling like a glowing cocoon. Looking
down, Kaz saw rows of heavily armoured wagons capped by domed gun
turrets. Their wheels were large and linked by a thick tread. On each wagon,
a massive gun barrel – somewhere between the shape of a rifle and a
cannon – jutted out into the space where a team of horses would ordinarily
be hitched.
“What are those things?” he whispered.
“Torvegen,” Matthias said under his breath. “They don’t need horses to pull
them. They were still perfecting the design when I left.”
“No horses?”
“Tanks,” murmured Jesper. “I saw prototypes when I was working with a
gunsmith in Novyi Zem.
Multiple guns in the turret, and that big barrel out in front? Serious
firepower.”
There were also gravity-fed heavy artillery guns in the enclosure, racks full
of rifles, ammunition, and the little black bombs that Ravkans called
grenatye. On the walls behind the glass, older weapons had been arranged
in an elaborate display – axes, spears, longbows. Above it all hung a banner
in silver and white: STRYMAKT FJERDAN.
When Kaz glanced at Matthias, the big man muttered, “Fjerdan might.”
Kaz peered through the thick glass. He knew defences, and Nina had been
right, this glass was another piece of Fabrikator work – bulletproof and
impenetrable. Coming or going from the prison, captives would see
weapons, armaments, machines of war – all a brutal reminder of the power
of the Fjerdan state.
Go on and flex, Kaz thought. Doesn’t matter how big the gun is if you don’t
know where to point it.
On the other side of the enclosure, he saw a second walkway, where the
female prisoners were being marched.
Inej will be fine. He had to stay sharp. They were in enemy territory now, a
place of steep risk, the kind of fix you didn’t walk out of if you didn’t keep
your wits about you. Had Pekka’s team made it this far before they’d been
found out? And where was Pekka Rollins himself? Had he stayed safe and
secure in Kerch, or was he a prisoner of the Fjerdans as well?
None of it mattered. For now, Kaz had to focus on the plan and finding YulBayur. He glanced at the others. Wylan looked as if he was ready to wet
himself. Helvar appeared grim as always. Jesper just grinned and
whispered, “Well, we’ve managed to get ourselves locked into the most
secure prison in the world. We’re either geniuses or the dumbest sons of
bitches to ever breathe air.”
“We’ll know soon enough.”
They were led into another white room, this one equipped with tin tubs and
hoses.
The guard gabbled something in Fjerdan, and Kaz saw Matthias and some
of the others start to strip down. He swallowed the bile that rose in his
throat. He refused to vomit.
He could do this, he had to do this. He thought of Jordie. What would
Jordie say if his little brother lost their chance at justice because he couldn’t
conquer some stupid sickness inside him? But it only brought back the
memory of Jordie’s cold flesh, the way it had grown loose in the salt water,
the bodies crowding around him in the flatboat. His vision started to blur.
Get it together, Brekker, he scolded himself harshly. It didn’t help. He was
going to faint again, and this would all be over. Inej had once offered to
teach him how to fall. “The trick is not getting knocked down,” he’d told
her with a laugh. “No, Kaz,” she’d said, “the trick is in getting back up.”
More Suli platitudes, but somehow even the memory of her voice helped.
He was better than this. He had to be. Not just for Jordie, but for his crew.
He’d brought these people here. He’d brought Inej here. It was his job to
bring them out again.
The trick is in getting back up. He kept her voice in his head, repeating
those words, again and again, as he stripped off his boots, his clothes, and
finally his gloves.
He saw that Jesper was staring at his hands. “What were you expecting?”
Kaz growled.
“Claws, at least,” Jesper said, shifting his gaze to his own bony bare feet.
“Possibly a spiny thumb.”
The guard returned from dumping their clothes in a bin that would no doubt
be taken to the incinerator. He tilted Kaz’s head back roughly and forced his
mouth open, feeling around with fat fingers. Black spots bloomed in Kaz’s
sight as he fought to remain conscious. The guard’s fingers passed over the
spot between Kaz’s teeth where he’d wedged the baleen, then pinched and
prodded the interior of his cheeks.
“Ondetjärn! ” the guard exclaimed. “Fellenjuret! ” he shouted again as he
pulled two slender pieces of metal from Kaz’s mouth. The lockpicks hit the
stone floor with a plink-plink. The guard shouted something at him in
Fjerdan and cuffed him hard across the face. Kaz fell to his knees, but
forced himself back up. He registered Wylan’s panicked expression, but it
was all he could do to stay on his feet as the guard shoved him into line for
an ice-cold shower.
When he emerged, soaked and shaking, another guard handed him
colourless, prison-issue trousers and a tunic from the stack beside him. Kaz
pulled them on, then limped to the holding area with the rest of the
prisoners. In that moment, he would have given up half his share of the
thirty million kruge for the familiar heft of his cane.
The holding cells looked much more like the prison he had anticipated – no
white stone or glass displays, just dank grey rock and iron bars.
They were herded into an already crowded cell. Helvar sat down with his
back to the wall, surveying the pacing men, eyes slitted. Kaz rested against
the iron bars, watching the guards depart.
He could sense the movements of the bodies behind him. There was space
enough, but they still felt too close. Just a little longer, Kaz told himself.
His hands felt impossibly bare.
Kaz waited. He knew what was coming. He’d sussed out the others as soon
as they entered the cell, and he knew it would be the burly Kaelish with the
birthmark who came for him. He was twitchy, nervous, and he’d taken
obvious notice of Kaz’s limp.
“Hey, cripple,” the Kaelish said in Fjerdan. He tried again in Kerch, his lilt
heavy. “Hey, crip.” He needn’t have bothered. Kaz knew the word for
cripple in plenty of languages.
The next second, Kaz felt the air move as the Kaelish reached for him. He
stepped left, and the Kaelish lurched forward, carried by his own
momentum. Kaz helped him along, seizing the man’s arm and driving it
through the space between bars, all the way up to the shoulder. The Kaelish
let out a loud grunt as his face smashed up against the iron bars.
Kaz braced the man’s forearm against the metal. He threw his weight
against his opponent’s body, and felt a satisfying pop as the Kaelish’s arm
dislocated from his shoulder. As the man opened his lips to scream, Kaz
covered his mouth with one hand and pinched his nose shut with the other.
The feel of bare flesh on his fingers made him want to gag.
“Shhhhhh,” he said, using his grip on the man’s nose to steer him
backwards to the bench against the wall. The other prisoners scattered to
clear a path.
The man sat down hard, eyes watering, breathless. Kaz kept his hold on his
nose and mouth. The Kaelish trembled beneath his grasp.
“You want me to put it back?” Kaz asked.
The Kaelish whimpered.
“Do you?”
He whimpered louder as the prisoners looked on.
“You scream, and I’ll make sure it never works right again, understand?”
He released the man’s mouth and shoved his arm back into its socket. The
Kaelish rolled over on his side, curled up on the bench, and began to weep.
Kaz wiped his hands on his trousers and returned to his spot by the bars. He
could feel the others watching, but now he knew he would be left in peace.
Helvar came up beside him. “Was that really necessary?”
“No.” But it had been – to make sure they were left alone to do what needed
to be done, and to remember that he wasn’t helpless.
Jesper wanted to pace, but he’d staked out this spot on the bench, and he
intended to keep it. It felt like little quakes of anxiety and excitement were
vibrating under his skin, and Wylan seated next to him drumming
frenetically on his kneecaps wasn’t helping him settle. He didn’t think he
could handle much more waiting. First the boat, then all that hiking, and
now he was stuck in a cell until the guards came by to make their evening
head count.
Only his father had understood his restless energy. He’d tried to get Jesper
to use it up on the farm, but the work had been too monotonous. University
was supposed to be the thing that gave him direction, but instead he’d
wandered down a different path. He cringed at what his father would say if
he learned his son had died in a Fjerdan prison. Then again, how would he
ever know? That was too depressing to dwell on.
How much time had passed? What if they couldn’t even hear the Elderclock
in here? The guards
were supposed to make the head count at six bells. Then Jesper and the
others would have until midnight to get the job done. They hoped. Matthias
had only spent three months at the prison.
Protocols could have changed. He might have got something wrong. Or
maybe the Fjerdan just wants us behind bars before he rats us out.
But Matthias was sitting silently on the far side of the cell near Kaz. Jesper
hadn’t been able to miss Kaz’s little skirmish with the Kaelish. Kaz was
usually unshakeable during a job, but now he was on edge, and Jesper
didn’t know why. Part of him wanted to ask, though he knew that was the
stupid part, the hopeful farmboy who picked the worst possible person to
care about, who searched for signs in things that he knew deep down meant
nothing – when Kaz chose him for a job, when Kaz played along with one
of his jokes. He could have kicked himself. He’d finally seen the infamous
Kaz Brekker without a stitch of clothing, and he’d been too worried about
ending up on a pike to pay proper attention.
But if Jesper was anxious, Wylan looked as if he might actually throw up.
“What are we supposed to do now?” Wylan whispered. “What good is a
lockpick without his picks?”
“Be quiet.”
“And what good are you? A sharpshooter without his guns. You’re
completely extraneous to this
mission.”
“It’s not a mission; it’s a job.”
“Matthias calls it a mission.”
“He’s military, you’re not. And I’m already in jail, so don’t tempt me to
commit homicide.”
“You aren’t going to kill me, and I’m not going to pretend everything is
okay. We’re stuck in here.”
“You’re definitely better suited to a gilded cage than to a real one.”
“I left my father ’s house.”
“Yeah, you gave up a life of luxury so you could slum it with us sobs in the
Barrel. That doesn’t make you interesting, Wylan, just stupid.”
“You don’t know anything about it.”
“So tell me,” Jesper said, turning to him. “We have time. What makes a
good little merch boy leave home to keep company with criminals?”
“You act like you were born in the Barrel like Kaz, but you’re not even
Kerch. You chose this life, too.”
“I like cities.”
“They don’t have cities in Novyi Zem?”
“Not like Ketterdam. Have you ever even been anywhere but home, the
Barrel, and fancy embassy
dinners?”
Wylan looked away. “Yes.”
“Where? The suburbs for peach season?”
“The races at Caryeva. The Shu oil fields. The jurda farms near Shriftport.
Weddle. Elling.”
“Really?”
“My father used to take me everywhere with him.”
“Until?”
“Until what?”
“Until. My father took me everywhere until I contracted terrible
seasickness, until I vomited at a royal wedding, until I tried to hump the
ambassador ’s leg.”
“The leg was asking for it.”
Jesper released a bark of laughter. “Finally, a little spine.”
“I have plenty of spine,” Wylan grumbled. “And look where it got—”
He was interrupted by a guard’s voice shouting in Fjerdan just as the
Elderclock began to chime six bells. At least the Fjerdans were punctual.
The guard spoke again in Shu and then in Kerch. “On your feet.”
“Shimkopper,” the guard demanded. They all looked at him blankly. “The
piss bucket,” he tried in Kerch. “Where is … to empty?” He pantomimed.
There were shrugs and confused glances.
The guard’s gloomy sulk made it clear he couldn’t care less. He shoved a
bucket of fresh water into the cell and slammed the bars shut.
Jesper pushed to the front and took a big gulp from the cup tied to its
handle. Most of it splashed on his shirt. When he handed the cup to Wylan,
he made sure it soaked him as well.
“What are you doing?” Wylan protested.
“Patience, Wylan. And do try to follow along.”
Jesper hiked up his pants and felt around the thin skin over his ankle.
“Tell me what’s happen—”
“Be quiet. I need to concentrate.” It was true. He really didn’t want the
pellet buried beneath his skin to open up while it was still inside him.
He felt along the thin stitches Nina had placed there. It hurt like hell when
he popped them open and slid the pellet out. It was about the size of a raisin
and slick with his blood. Nina would be using her powers to split open her
own skin right now. Jesper wondered if it hurt any less than the stitches.
“Pull your shirt up over your mouth,” he told Wylan.
“What?”
“Stop being dense. You’re cuter when you’re smart.”
Wylan’s cheeks went pink. He scowled and pulled his collar up.
Jesper reached under the bench where he’d hidden the waste bucket and
pulled it out.
“A storm’s coming,” Jesper said loudly in Kerch. He saw Matthias and Kaz
draw their collars up.
He turned his face away, pulled his shirt over his mouth, and dropped the
pellet into the bucket.
There was a sizzling whoosh as a cloud of mist bloomed from the water. In
seconds it had blanketed the cells, turning the air a milky green.
Wylan’s eyes were panicked above his hiked-up collar. Jesper was tempted
to pretend to faint, but he settled for the effect of men toppling to the
ground all around him.
Jesper waited for a count of sixty, then dropped his collar and took a
tentative breath. The air still smelled sickly sweet and would leave them
woozy for a bit, but the worst of it had dispersed. When the guards came
through for the next head count, the prisoners would have bad headaches
but not much to tell. And hopefully by then they’d be long gone.
“Was that chloro gas?”
“Definitely cuter when you’re smart. Yes, the pellet’s an enzyme-based
casing filled with chloro powder. It’s harmless unless it comes into contact
with any amount of ammonia. Which it just did.”
“The urine in the bucket … but what was the point? We’re still stuck in
here.”
“Jesper,” Kaz said waving him over to the bars. “The clock is ticking.”
Jesper rolled his shoulders as he approached. This kind of work usually
took a lot of time, particularly because he’d never had real training. He
placed his hands on either side of a single bar and concentrated on locating
the purest particles of ore.
“What is he doing?” asked Matthias.
“Performing an ancient Zemeni ritual,” Kaz said.
“Really?”
“No.”
A murky haze was forming between Jesper ’s hands.
Wylan gasped. “Is that iron ore?”
Jesper nodded as he felt sweat break out on his brow.
“Can you dissolve the bars?”
“Don’t be an idiot,” Jesper grunted. “Do you see how thick they are?” In
fact, the bar he was working on looked unchanged, but he’d pulled enough
iron from it that the cloud between his hands was nearly black. He bent his
fingertips, and the particles spun, whirring into a tightening spiral that grew
narrower and denser.
Jesper dropped his hands, and a slender needle fell to the floor with a
musical ping.
Wylan snatched it up, holding it so the light gleamed over its dull surface.
“You’re a Fabrikator,” Matthias said grimly.
“Just barely.”
“You either are or you aren’t,” said Wylan.
“I am.” He jabbed a finger at Wylan. “And you’re going to keep your
mouth shut about it when we get back to Ketterdam.”
“But why would you lie about—”
“I like walking the streets free,” said Jesper. “I like not worrying about
being snatched up by a slaver or put to death by some skiv like our friend
Helvar here. Besides, I have other skills that bring me more pleasure and
profit than this. Lots of other skills.”
Wylan coughed. Flirting with him might actually be more fun than
annoying him, but it was a close call.
“Does Nina know you’re Grisha?”
“No and she’s not finding out. I don’t need lectures about joining the
Second Army and the glorious Ravkan cause.”
“Do it again,” Kaz interrupted. “And hurry.”
Jesper repeated his effort on another bar.
“If this was the plan, what was the point to trying to smuggle in those
lockpicks?” Wylan asked.
Kaz folded his arms. “Ever hear about the dying man whose medik told him
he’d been miraculously cured? He danced into the street and was trampled
to death by a horse. You have to let the mark feel like he’s won. Were the
guards studying Matthias and wondering if he looked familiar?
Were they looking for trouble when Jesper went into the showers with
paraffin sloughing off his arms? No, they were too busy congratulating
themselves on catching me. They thought they’d neutralised the threat.”
When Jesper finished, Kaz took the two slender lockpicks between his
fingers. It was strange to see him work without his gloves, but in moments,
the lock clicked open, and they were free. Once they were out, Kaz used his
picks to lock the door behind them.
“You know your assignments,” he whispered. “Wylan and I will get Nina
and Inej out. Jesper, you and Matthias—”
“I know, nab as much rope as we can find.”
“Be in the basement by the half chime.”
They split. The wheels were in motion.
According to Wylan’s plans, the stables were adjacent to the gatehouse
courtyard, so they would have to backtrack through the holding area. In
theory, this section of the prison was only supposed to be active when
prisoners were being processed in or out, but they still had to be careful. It
would only take one wayward guard to ruin their plans. The scariest part
was traversing the walkway through the glass enclosure, a long, brightly lit
stretch that left them completely exposed. There was nothing to do except
cross their fingers and make a run for it. Then they headed down the stairs
and to the left of the chamber where that poor old Grisha amplifier had
tested him. Jesper suppressed a shudder. Even though paraffin on his arms
always worked at the gambling dens, his heart had still been hammering as
he faced her. She’d been thin as a husk and as empty. That was what
happened to Grisha who got found in the wrong place at the wrong time – a
life sentence of slavery or worse.
When Jesper pushed open the door to the stables, he felt some small thing
inside him relax. The smell of the hay, the shift of animals in their stalls, the
nickering of the horses brought back memories of Novyi Zem. In
Ketterdam, the canals rendered most coaches and wagons unnecessary.
Horses were a luxury, an indulgence to show that you had the space to keep
them and the wealth to care for them. He hadn’t realised how much he
missed simply being around animals.
But there was no time for nostalgia or to stop and stroke a velvety nose. He
strode past the stalls and into the tack room. Matthias hoisted a massive coil
of rope over each shoulder. He looked surprised when Jesper managed two
as well.
“Grew up on a farm,” Jesper explained.
“You don’t look it.”
“Sure, I’m skinny,” he said as they hurried back through the stables, “but I
stay drier in the rain.”
“How?”
“Less falls on me.”
“Are all of Kaz’s associates as strange as this crew?” Matthias asked.
“Oh, you should meet the rest of the Dregs. They make us look like
Fjerdans.”
They passed through the showers and, instead of continuing to the holding
area, turned down a tight flight of stairs and the long dark hall that led to the
basement. They were under the main prison now, five storeys of cellblock,
prisoners, and guards stacked on top of them.
Jesper had expected the rest of the crew to be collecting demo supplies in
the big laundry room already. But all he saw were giant tin tubs, long tables
for folding, and clothes left to dry overnight on racks taller than he was.
They found Wylan and Inej in the refuse room. It was smaller than the
laundry and stank of garbage. Two big rolling bins full of discarded clothes
were pushed against one wall, waiting to be burned. Jesper felt the heat
emanating from the incinerator as soon as they entered.
“We have a problem,” Wylan said.
“How bad?” Jesper asked, dumping his coils of rope on the floor.
Inej gestured to a pair of big metal doors set into what looked like a giant
chimney that jutted out from the wall and stretched all the way up to the
ceiling. “I think they ran the incinerator this afternoon.”
“You said they ran it in the mornings,” he said to Matthias.
“They used to.”
When Jesper grabbed the doors’ leather-covered handles and pulled them
open, he was hit by a blast of searing air. It carried the black and acrid smell
of coal – and something else, a chemical smell, maybe something they
added to make the fires burn hotter. It wasn’t unpleasant. This was where all
the refuse from the prisons was disposed of – kitchen leavings, buckets of
human filth, the clothing stripped from prisoners, but whatever the Fjerdans
had added to the fuel burned hot enough to sear any foulness away. He
leaned in, already beginning to sweat. Far below, he saw the incinerator
coals, banked but still pulsing with an angry red glow.
“Wylan, give me a shirt from one of the bins,” Jesper said.
He tore off one of the sleeves and tossed it into the shaft. It fell soundlessly,
caught flame mid-air, and had begun to burn away to nothing before it ever
had the chance to reach the coals.
He shut the doors and tossed the remnants of the shirt back in the bin.
“Well, demo is out,” he said.
“We can’t take explosives in there. Can you still make the climb?” he asked
Inej.
“Maybe. I don’t know.”
“What does Kaz say? Where is Kaz? And where’s Nina?”
“Kaz doesn’t know about the incinerator yet,” said Inej. “He and Nina went
to search the upper cells.”
Matthias’ glower went dark as a rain-heavy sky ready to split. “Jesper and I
were supposed to go with Nina.”
“Kaz didn’t want to wait.”
“We were on time,” said Matthias angrily. “What is he up to?”
Jesper wondered the same thing. “He’s going to limp up and down all those
flights of stairs, dodging patrols?”
“I may have tried to point that out to him,” Inej said. “Always surprising,
remember?”
“Like a hive of bees. I really hope we’re not all about to get stung.”
“Inej,” Wylan called from one of the rolling bins. “These are our clothes.”
He reached in and, one after the other, pulled out Inej’s little leather
slippers.
Her face broke into a dazzling smile. Finally, a bit of luck. Kaz didn’t have
his cane. Jesper didn’t have his guns. And Inej didn’t have her knives. But
at least she had those magic slippers.
“What do you say, Wraith? Can you make the climb?”
“I can.”
Jesper took the shoes from Wylan. “If I didn’t think these might be crawling
with disease, I would kiss them and then you.”
Nina trailed Kaz up the stairs. Flight upon steep flight of stone and
flickering gaslight. She watched him closely. He was setting a good pace,
but his gait was stiff. Why had he insisted on being the one to make this
climb? It couldn’t be a question of time, so maybe it was what Kaz always
intended. Maybe he’d meant to keep some bit of information from Matthias.
Or he was just determined to keep them all guessing.
They paused at every landing, listening for patrols. The prison was full of
sounds, and it was hard not to jump at every one of them – voices floating
down the stairwell, the metallic clang of doors opening and closing. Nina
thought of the violent chaos of Hellgate, bribes changing hands, blood
staining the sand, a world away from this sterile place. The Fjerdans could
certainly be counted on to keep things orderly.
On their way up the fourth flight, voices and bootsteps suddenly burst into
the stairwell. Hurriedly, Nina and Kaz backtracked to the third floor landing
and slipped through the door leading to the cells.
The prisoner in the cell nearest to them started to shout. Nina quickly raised
a hand and squeezed his airway shut. He stared at her, eyes bulging,
clawing at his neck. She dropped his pulse, sending him into
unconsciousness as she released the pressure on his larynx, allowing him to
breathe. They needed him quiet, not dead.
The noises grew as the guards clambered down the stairs, loud Fjerdan
reverberating off the walls.
Nina held her breath, watching the door, hands ready. Kaz had no weapon,
but he’d dropped into a fighting stance, waiting to see if the door would
crash open. Instead, the guards continued on past the landing, down to the
next floor.
When the sounds had faded, Kaz signalled to her, and they slipped back out
the door, closing it as silently as possible behind them, and continued their
ascent.
Seven bells struck as they reached the top floor. One hour had passed since
they’d knocked out the prisoners in the holding area. They had forty-five
minutes to search the high-security cells, meet back at the landing, and get
to the basement. Kaz gestured for her to take the corridor on the left while
he took the right.
The door creaked loudly as Nina stepped inside. The lanterns were spaced
far apart here, and the shadows between them looked deep enough to fall
into. She told herself to be grateful for the cover, but she couldn’t deny it
was eerie. The cells were different, too, with doors of solid steel instead of
iron bars. A viewing grate was lodged into each of them at eye level. Well,
eye level for a Fjerdan.
Nina was tall, but she still had to stand on tiptoe to peek into them.
Most of the prisoners were asleep or resting, curled into corners or flat on
their backs with an arm thrown over their eyes to block out the dim
lamplight that filtered through the grate. Others sat propped against the
walls, staring listlessly at nothing. Occasionally she found someone pacing
back and forth and had to step away quickly. None of them were Shu.
“Ajor? ” one called after her in Fjerdan. She ignored him and moved on,
heart thudding.
What if Bo Yul-Bayur really was in these cells? She knew it was unlikely,
and yet … she could kill him in his cell, put him in a deep, painless sleep,
and simply stop his heart. She’d tell Kaz she hadn’t found him. And what if
Kaz located Bo Yul-Bayur? She might have to wait until they were out of
the Ice Court to find a solution, but she could at least count on Matthias to
help her. What a strange, grim bargain they’d struck.
But as she worked her way back and forth along the corridors, the tiny hope
that the scientist might be there withered away to nothing. One more row of
cells, she thought, then back down to the basement with nothing to show for
it. Except when she entered the final corridor, she saw it was shorter than
the others. Where there should have been more cells there was a steel door,
bright light shining beneath it.
A flutter of unease passed through her as she approached, but she made
herself push the door open.
She had to squint against the brightness. The light was harsh – as clear as
daylight but with none of its warmth – and she couldn’t locate its source.
She heard the door whooshing closed behind her. At the last moment she
whirled and grabbed it by the edge. Something told her this door would
need a key to unlock it from the inside. She looked for anything she might
use to prop it open, and had to settle for tearing off a piece from the bottom
of her prison trousers and stuffing it in the lock.
This place felt wrong. The walls, floor, and ceiling were a white so clean it
hurt to look at. Half of one wall was made up of panels of smooth, perfect
glass. Fabrikatormade. Just like the glass enclosure surrounding that vile
display of weaponry. No Fjerdan craftsman could make surfaces so pristine.
Grisha power had been used to create this glass, she felt sure of it. There
were rogue Grisha who served no country and who might consider hiring
themselves out to the Fjerdan government. But would they survive such a
commission? Slave labour seemed more likely.
Nina took one step, then another. She glanced back over her shoulder. If a
guard entered the corridor behind her, she’d have nowhere to hide. So move,
Nina.
She peered inside the first window. The cell was as white as the hallway
and illuminated by that same sustained, bright light. The room was empty
and devoid of any kind of furniture – no bench, no basin, no bucket. The
only break in all that whiteness was a drain at the very centre of the floor,
surrounded by reddish stains.
She continued to the next cell. It was identical and equally empty, as was
the next, and the next. But here something caught her eye, a coin lying next
to the drain – no, not a coin, a button. A tiny silver button emblazoned with
a wing, the symbol of a Grisha Squaller. She felt a chill creep over her
arms.
Had these cells been crafted by Grisha slaves for Grisha prisoners? Had the
glass, the walls, the floor been made to withstand Fabrikator manipulation?
The rooms were devoid of metal. There was no plumbing, no pipes to carry
water that a Tidemaker might abuse. And Nina suspected that the glass she
was peering through was mirrored on the other side, so that a Heartrender in
the cell wouldn’t be able to locate a target. These were cells designed to
hold Grisha. Designed to hold her.
She whirled on her heel. Bo Yul-Bayur wasn’t here, and she wanted out of
this place right now. She snatched the fabric from the lock and blew
through the door, not stopping to make sure it closed behind her. The
corridor of iron cells was even darker after the brightness that had come
before, and she stumbled as she raced back the way she’d come. Nina knew
she was being incautious, but she couldn’t get the image of those white
rooms out of her head. The drain. The stains around it. Had Grisha been
tortured there? Made to confess their crimes against the people?
She’d studied the Fjerdans – their leaders, their language. She’d even
dreamed of entering the Ice Court as a spy just like this, of striking at the
heart of this nation that hated her so much. But now that she was here, she
just wanted to be gone. She’d grown used to Ketterdam, to the adventures
that came with her involvement with the Dregs, to her easy life at the White
Rose. But even there, had she ever felt safe? In a city where she couldn’t
walk down the streets without fear? I want to go home. The longing for it
hit her hard, a physical ache. I want to go back to Ravka.
The Elderclock began to chime a soft three-quarter-hour. She was late. Still,
she forced her steps to slow before she opened the door into the stairway.
There was no one there, not even Kaz. She ducked her head into the
opposite passage to see if he was coming. Nothing – iron doors, deep
shadow, no sign of Kaz.
Nina waited, unsure of what to do. They’d been meant to meet on the
landing with fifteen minutes to spare before the hour. What if he was in
some kind of trouble? She hesitated, then plunged down the corridor Kaz
had been responsible for searching. She raced past the cells, the hallways
snaking back and forth, but Kaz was nowhere to be found.
Enough, thought Nina when she reached the end of the second corridor.
Either Kaz had abandoned her and was already downstairs with the others,
or he’d been caught and dragged off somewhere.
Either way, she had to get to the incinerator. Once she found the others they
could figure out what to do.
She sped back through the halls and threw open the door to the landing.
Two guards stood chatting at the head of the stairs. For a moment, they
stared at her, open-mouthed.
“Sten! ” one shouted in Fjerdan, ordering her to halt as they fumbled for
their guns. Nina threw out both hands, fingers forming fists, and watched
the guards topple backwards. One fell flat on the landing, but the other
tumbled down the stairs, his rifle firing, sending bullets pinging against the
stone walls, the sound echoing down the stairwell. Kaz was going to kill
her. She was going to kill Kaz.
Nina hurtled past the guards’ bodies, down one flight, two flights. On the
third floor landing a door flew open as a guard burst into the stairwell. Nina
twisted her hands in the air, and the guard’s neck broke with an audible
snap. She was plunging down the next flight before his body struck the
ground.
That was when the Elderclock began to chime. Not the steady tolling of the
hour, but a shrill clamour, high and percussive – a sound of alarm.
Inej looked up, into the dark. High above her floated a small, grey patch of
evening sky. Six levels to climb in the dark with her hands slippery from
sweat and the fires of hell burning below, with the rope weighing her down
and no net to catch her. Climb, Inej.
Bare hands were best for climbing, but the incinerator walls were far too
hot to permit that. So Wylan and Jesper had helped her fish Kaz’s gloves
from the laundry bins. She hesitated briefly. Kaz would tell her to just put
the gloves on, to do whatever it took to get the job done. And yet, she felt
curiously guilty as she slid the supple black leather over her hands, as if she
had crept into his rooms without his permission, read his letters, lain down
in his bed. The gloves were unlined, with the slenderest slashes hidden in
the fingertips. For sleight of hand, she realised, so that he can keep contact
with coins or cards or finesse the workings of a lock. Touch without touch.
There was no time to acclimatise herself to the oversized feel of the gloves.
Besides, she’d climbed with covered hands plenty of times when the
Ketterdam winters had turned her fingers numb. She flexed her toes in her
little leather slippers, revelling in the familiar feel of them on her feet,
bouncing on her nubbly rubber soles, fearless and eager. The heat was
nothing, mere discomfort. The weight of seventy feet of rope coiled around
her body? She was the Wraith. She’d suffered worse. She launched herself
up into the chimney with pure confidence.
When her fingers made contact with the stone, she hissed in a breath. Even
through the leather, she could feel the dense heat of the bricks. Without the
gloves, her skin would have started to blister right away. But there was
nothing to do except hold on. She climbed – hand then foot, then hand
again, seeking the next small crack, the next divot in the soot-slick walls.
Sweat coursed down her back. They’d doused the rope and her clothes in
water, but it didn’t seem to be doing much good. Her whole body felt
flushed, suffused with blood as if she were being slowly cooked in her own
skin.
Her feet pulsed with heat. They felt heavy, clumsy, as if they belonged to
someone else. She tried to centre herself. She trusted her body. She knew
her own strength and exactly what she could do.
Another hand up, forcing her limbs to cooperate, seeking a rhythm, but
finding only an awkward syncopation that left her muscles trembling with
every upwards gain. She reached for the next hold, digging in. Climb, Inej.
Her foot slipped. Her toes lost contact with the wall, and her stomach
lurched as she felt the pull of her weight and the rope. She gripped the
stone, digging into the cracks, Kaz’s gloves bunching around her damp
fingers. Again, her toes sought purchase, but only slid over the bricks. Then
her
other foot began to slip, too. She sucked in a gust of searing air. Something
was wrong. She risked a glance down. Far below, she saw the red glow of
the coals, but it was what she saw on her feet that shocked her heart into a
panicked gallop. They were a gummy mess. The soles of her shoes – her
perfect, beloved shoes – were melting.
It’s all right, she told herself. Just change your grip. Put your weight in
your shoulders. The rubber will cool as you go higher. It will help you grip.
But her feet felt like they were on fire. Seeing what was happening had
somehow made it worse, as if the rubber was fusing with her flesh.
Inej blinked the sweat from her eyes and hauled herself up a few more
inches. From somewhere
above, she heard the chime of the Elderclock. The half hour? Or quarter
till? She had to move faster.
She should be on the roof by now, attaching the rope.
She pushed higher and her foot skidded down the brick. She dropped, her
whole body stuttering against the wall as she scrambled for purchase. There
was no one to save her. No Kaz to come to her rescue, no net waiting to
break her fall, only the fire ready to claim her.
Inej canted her head back, seeking that patch of sky. It still seemed
impossibly distant. How far was it? Twenty feet? Thirty? It might as well
have been miles. She was going to die here, slowly, horribly on the coals.
They were all going to die – Kaz, Nina, Jesper, Matthias, Wylan – and it
was her fault.
No. No, it wasn’t.
She hefted herself up another foot – Kaz brought us here – and then another.
She forced herself to find the next hold. Kaz and his greed. She didn’t feel
guilty. She wasn’t sorry. She was just mad. Mad at Kaz for attempting this
insane job, furious with herself for agreeing to it.
And why had she? To pay off her debt? Or because despite all good sense
and better intentions, she’d let herself feel something for the bastard of the
Barrel?
When Inej entered Tante Heleen’s salon on that long ago night, Kaz
Brekker had been waiting, dressed in darkest grey, leaning on his crow’s
head cane. The salon was furnished in gold and teal, one wall patterned
entirely in peacock feathers. Inej hated every inch of the Menagerie – the
parlour where she and the other girls were forced to coo and bat their lashes
at prospective clients, her bedroom that had been made up to look like some
farcical version of a Suli caravan, festooned in purple silk and redolent with
incense – but Tante Heleen’s salon was the worst. It was the room for
beatings, for Heleen’s worst rages.
Inej had tried to escape when she’d first arrived in Ketterdam. She’d got
two blocks from the Menagerie, still in her silks, dazed by the light and
chaos of West Stave, running without direction, before Cobbet had clamped
a meaty hand on the nape of her neck and hauled her back. Heleen took her
into the salon and beat her badly enough that she hadn’t been able to work
for a week. For the month after, Heleen had kept her in golden chains, not
even letting her go down to the parlour. When she’d finally unlocked the
shackles, Heleen had said, “You owe me for a month of lost income. Run
again, and I’ll have you thrown in Hellgate for breach of contract.”
That night, she’d entered the salon with dread, and when she’d seen Kaz
Brekker there, her dread only doubled. Dirtyhands must have informed on
her. He’d told Tante Heleen that she’d spoken out of turn, that she’d been
trying to make trouble.
But Heleen had leaned back in her silken chair and said, “Well, little lynx, it
seems you’re someone else’s problem now. Apparently Per Haskell has a
taste for Suli girls. He’s purchased your indenture for a very tidy sum.”
Inej swallowed. “I’m moving to a different house?”
Heleen waved a hand. “Haskell does own a pleasure house – if you can call
it that – somewhere in the lower Barrel, but you’d be a waste of his money
there – though you’d certainly learn just how kind Tante Heleen has been to
you. No, Haskell wants you for his very own.”
Who was Per Haskell? Does it matter? said a voice inside her. He’s a man
who buys women. That’s all you need to know.
Inej’s distress must have been obvious because Tante Heleen laughed
lightly. “Don’t worry. He’s old, disgustingly old, but he seems harmless
enough. Of course, one never knows.” She lifted a shoulder. “Perhaps he’ll
share you with his errand boy, Mister Brekker.”
Kaz turned his cold eyes on Tante Heleen. “Are we done?” It was the first
time Inej had heard him speak, and she was startled by the rough burn of his
voice.
Heleen sniffed, adjusting the neckline of her shimmering blue gown. “We
are indeed, you little wretch.” She heated a stick of peacock blue wax and
affixed her seal to the document before her.
Then, she rose and examined her reflection in the looking glass that hung
above the mantel. Inej watched Heleen straighten the diamond choker on
her neck, the jewels glinting brightly. Through the din of confusion in her
head, Inej thought, They look like stolen stars.
“Goodbye, little lynx,” said Tante Heleen. “I doubt you’ll last more than a
month in that part of the Barrel.” She glanced at Kaz. “Don’t be surprised if
she runs. She’s faster than she looks. But maybe Per Haskell will enjoy that,
too. See yourselves out.”
She swept from the room in a billow of silk and honeyed perfume, leaving a
stunned Inej in her wake.
Slowly, Kaz crossed the room and shut the door. Inej tensed for whatever
was to come next, fingers twisting in her silks.
“Per Haskell runs the Dregs,” Kaz said. “You’ve heard of us?”
“They’re your gang.”
“Yes, and Haskell is my boss. Yours, too, if you like.”
She summoned her courage and said, “And if I don’t like?”
“I withdraw the offer and go back home looking like a fool. You stay here
with that monster Heleen.”
Inej’s hands flew to her mouth. “She listens,” Inej whispered, terrified.
“Let her listen. The Barrel has all kinds of monsters in it, and some of them
are very beautiful indeed. I pay Heleen for information. In fact, I pay her
too much for information. But I know exactly what she is. I asked Per
Haskell to pay off your indenture. Do you know why?”
“You like Suli girls?”
“I don’t know enough Suli girls to say.” He moved to the desk and picked
up the document, tucking it in his coat. “The other night, when you spoke to
me—”
“I meant no offence, I—”
“You wanted to offer me information. Perhaps in return for help? A letter to
your parents? Some extra pay?”
Inej cringed. That was exactly what she’d wanted. She’d overheard gossip
about a silk trade and had thought to make some kind of exchange. It was
foolish, brash.
“Is Inej Ghafa your real name?”
A strange sound escaped Inej’s throat, part sob, part laugh, a weak,
embarrassing sound, but it had been months since she’d heard her own
name, her family name. “Yes,” she managed.
“Is that what you prefer to be called?”
“Of course,” she said, then added, “Is Kaz Brekker your real name?”
“Real enough. Last night, when you approached me, I didn’t know you
were anywhere near me until you spoke.”
Inej frowned. She’d wanted to be silent so she had been. What did that
matter?
“Bells on your ankles,” Kaz said, gesturing to her costume, “but I didn’t
hear you. Purple silks and spots painted on your shoulders, but I didn’t see
you. And I see everything.” She shrugged, and he cocked his head to one
side. “Were you trained as a dancer?”
“An acrobat.” She paused. “My whole family are acrobats.”
“High wire?”
“And swings. Juggling. Tumbling.”
“Did you work with a net?”
“Only when I was very little.”
“Good. There aren’t any nets in Ketterdam. Have you ever been in a fight?”
She shook her head.
“Killed someone?”
Her eyes widened. “No.”
“Ever think about it?”
She paused and then crossed her arms. “Every night.”
“That’s a start.”
“I don’t want to kill people, not really.”
“That’s a solid policy until people want to kill you. And in our line of work
that happens a lot.”
“Our line of work?”
“I want you to join the Dregs.”
“Doing what?”
“Gathering information. I need a spider to climb the walls of Ketterdam’s
houses and businesses, to listen at windows and in the eaves. I need
someone who can be invisible, who can become a ghost.
Do you think you could do that?”
I’m already a ghost, she thought. I died in the hold of a slaver ship.
“I think so.”
“This city is full of rich men and women. You’re going to learn their habits,
their comings and goings, the dirty things they do at night, the crimes they
try to cover by day, their shoe sizes, their safe combinations, the toy they
loved best as a child. And I’m going to use that information to take away
their money.”
“What happens when you take their money and you become a rich man?”
Kaz’s mouth had quirked slightly at that. “Then you can steal my secrets,
too.”
“This is why you bought me?”
The humour vanished from his face. “Per Haskell didn’t buy you. He paid
off your indenture. That means you owe him money. A lot of it. But it’s a
real contract. Here,” he said, removing Heleen’s document from his coat. “I
want you to see something.”
“I don’t read Kerch.”
“It doesn’t matter. See these numbers? This is the price Heleen claims you
borrowed from her for transport from Ravka. This is the money you’ve
earned in her employ. And this is what you still owe her.”
“But … but that’s not possible. It’s more now than when I got here.”
“That’s right. She charged you for room, board, grooming.”
“She bought me,” Inej said, her anger rising despite herself. “I couldn’t
even read what I was signing.”
“Slavery is illegal in Kerch. Indentures are not. I know this contract is a
sham and any thinking judge would, too. Unfortunately, Heleen has many
thinking judges in her pocket. Per Haskell is offering you a loan – no more,
no less. Your contract will be in Ravkan. You’ll pay interest, but it won’t
break you. And as long as you pay him a certain percentage every month,
you’ll be free to come and go as you please.”
Inej shook her head. None of this seemed possible.
“Inej, let me be very clear with you. If you skip out on your contract,
Haskell will send people after you, people who make Tante Heleen look
like a doting grandmother. And I won’t stop him. I’m putting my neck on
the line for this little arrangement. It’s not a position I enjoy.”
“If this is true,” Inej said slowly. “Then I’m free to say no.”
“Of course. But you’re obviously dangerous,” he said. “I’d prefer you never
became dangerous to me.”
Dangerous. She wanted to clutch the word to her. She was fairly sure this
boy was demented or just hopelessly deluded, but she liked that word, and
unless she was mistaken, he was offering to let her walk out of this house
tonight.
“This isn’t … it isn’t a trick, is it?” Her voice was smaller than she wanted
it to be.
The shadow of something dark moved across Kaz’s face. “If it were a trick,
I’d promise you safety.
I’d offer you happiness. I don’t know if that exists in the Barrel, but you’ll
find none of it with me.”
For some reason, those words had comforted her. Better terrible truths than
kind lies.
“All right,” she said. “How do we begin?”
“Let’s start by getting out of here and finding you some proper clothes. Oh,
and Inej,” he said as he led her out of the salon. “Don’t ever sneak up on me
again.”
The truth was she’d tried to sneak up on Kaz plenty of times since then.
She’d never managed it. It was as if once Kaz had seen her, he’d understood
how to keep seeing her.
She’d trusted Kaz Brekker that night. She’d become the dangerous girl he’d
sensed lurking inside her. But she’d made the mistake of continuing to trust
him, of believing in the legend he’d built around himself. That myth had
brought her here to this sweltering darkness, balanced between life and
death like the last leaf clinging to an autumn branch. In the end, Kaz
Brekker was a just a boy, and she’d let him lead her to this fate.
She couldn’t even blame him. She’d let herself be led because she hadn’t
known where she’d wanted to go. The heart is an arrow. Four million
kruge, freedom, a chance to return home. She’d said she wanted these
things. But in her heart, she couldn’t bear the thought of returning to her
parents.
Could she tell her mother and father the truth? Would they understand all
she’d done to survive, not just at the Menagerie, but every day since? Could
she lay her head in her mother ’s lap and be forgiven? What would they see
when they looked at her?
Climb, Inej. But where was there to go? What life was waiting for her after
all she’d suffered? Her back ached. Her hands were bleeding. The muscles
in her legs shook with invisible tremors, and her skin felt ready to peel
away from her body. Every breath of black air seared her lungs. She
couldn’t breathe deeply. She couldn’t even focus on that grey patch of sky.
The sweat kept beading down her forehead and stinging her eyes. If she
gave up, she’d be giving up for all of them – for Jesper and Wylan, for Nina
and her Fjerdan, for Kaz. She couldn’t do that.
It isn’t up to you any longer, little lynx, Tante Heleen’s voice crooned in her
head. How long have you been holding on to nothing?
The heat of the incinerator wrapped around Inej like a living thing, a desert
dragon in his den, hiding from the ice, waiting for her. She knew her body’s
limits, and she knew she had no more to give. She’d made a bad wager. It
was as simple as that. The autumn leaf might cling to its branch, but it was
already dead. The only question was when it would fall.
Let go, Inej. Her father had taught her to climb, to trust the rope, the swing,
and finally, to trust in her own skill, to believe that if she leaped, she would
reach the other side. Would he be waiting for her there? She thought of her
knives, hidden away aboard the Ferolind – maybe they could go to some
other girl who dreamed of being dangerous. She whispered their names:
Petyr, Marya, Anastasia, Vladimir, Lizabeta, Sankta Alina, martyred before
she could turn eighteen. Let go, Inej. Should she jump now or simply wait
for her body to give out?
Inej felt wetness on her cheeks. Was she crying? Now? After everything
she’d done and had done to her?
Then she heard it, a soft patter, a gentle drum that had no real rhythm. She
felt it on her cheeks and face. She heard the hiss as it struck the coals below.
Rain. Cool and forgiving. Inej tilted her head back. Somewhere, she heard
bells ringing the three-quarter hour, but she didn’t care. She only heard the
music of the rain as it washed away the sweat and soot, the coalsmoke of
Ketterdam, the face paint of the Menagerie, as it bathed the jute strands of
the rope, and hardened the rubber on her suffering feet. It felt like a
blessing, though she knew Kaz would just call it weather.
She had to move now, quickly, before the stones grew slick and the rain
became an enemy. She forced her muscles to flex, her fingers to seek, and
pulled herself up one foot, then another, again and again, murmuring
prayers of gratitude to her Saints. Here was the rhythm that had eluded her
before, buried in the whispered cadence of their names.
But even as she gave thanks, she knew that the rain was not enough. She
wanted a storm – thunder, wind, a deluge. She wanted it to crash through
Ketterdam’s pleasure houses, lifting roofs and tearing doors off their hinges.
She wanted it to raise the seas, take hold of every slaving ship, shatter their
masts, and smash their hulls against unforgiving shores. I want to call that
storm, she thought. And four million kruge might be enough to do it.
Enough for her own ship – something small and fierce and laden with
firepower. Something like her. She would hunt the slavers and their buyers.
They would learn to fear her, and they would know her by her name. The
heart is an arrow. It demands aim to land true. She clung to the wall, but it
was purpose she grasped at long last, and that carried her upwards.
She was not a lynx or a spider or even the Wraith. She was Inej Ghafa, and
her future was waiting above.
Kaz sped through the upper cells, sparing brief seconds for a glance through
each grate. Bo Yul-Bayur would not be here. And he didn’t have much time.
Part of him felt unhinged. He had no cane. His feet were bare. He was in
strange clothes, his hands pale and ungloved. He didn’t feel like himself at
all. No, that wasn’t quite true. He felt like the Kaz he’d been in the weeks
after Jordie had died, like a wild animal, fighting to survive.
Kaz spotted a Shu prisoner lurking at the back of one of the cells.
“Sesh- uyeh,” Kaz whispered. The man stared at him blankly. “Yul-Bayur?”
Nothing. The man started shouting at him in Shu, and Kaz hurried away,
past the rest of the cells, then slipped out to the landing and charged down
to the next level as fast as he could manage. He knew he was being
reckless, selfish, but wasn’t that why they called him Dirtyhands? No job
too risky. No deed too low.
Dirtyhands would see the rough work done.
He wasn’t sure what was driving him. It was possible Pekka Rollins wasn’t
here. It was possible he was dead. But Kaz didn’t believe it. I’d know.
Somehow I’d know. “Your death belongs to me,” he whispered.
The swim back from the Reaper ’s Barge had been Kaz’s rebirth. The child
he’d been had died of firepox. The fever had burned away every gentle
thing inside him.
Survival wasn’t nearly as hard as he’d thought once he left decency behind.
The first rule was to find someone smaller and weaker and take what he
had. Though – small and weak as Kaz was – that was no easy task. He
shuffled up from the harbour, keeping to the alleys, heading towards the
neighbourhood where the Hertzoons had lived. When he spotted a
sweetshop, he waited outside, then waylaid a chubby little schoolboy
lagging behind his friends. Kaz knocked him down, emptied his pockets,
and took his bag of liquorice.
“Give me your trousers,” he’d said.
“They’re too big for you,” the boy had cried.
Kaz bit him. The boy gave up his trousers. Kaz rolled them in a ball and
threw them in the canal, then ran as fast as his weak legs would take him.
He didn’t want the trousers; he just wanted the boy to wait before he went
wailing for help. He knew the schoolboy would huddle in that alley for a
long while, weighing the shame of appearing half-dressed in the street with
the need to get home and tell what had happened.
Kaz stopped running when he reached the darkest alley he could find in the
Barrel. He crammed all the liquorice into his mouth at once, swallowing it
in painful gulps, and promptly vomited it up. He took the money and
bought a hot roll of white bread. He was barefoot and filthy. The baker gave
him a second roll just to stay away.
When he felt a bit stronger, a bit less shaky, he walked to East Stave. He
found the dingiest gambling den, one with no sign and just a single lonely
barker out front.
“I want a job,” he said at the door.
“Don’t have any, nub.”
“I’m good with numbers.”
The man laughed. “Can you clean a pisspot?”
“Yes.”
“Well, too bad. We already have a boy who cleans the pisspots.”
Kaz waited all night until he saw a boy about his age leave the premises. He
followed him for two blocks, then hit him in the head with a rock. He sat
down on the boy’s legs and pulled off his shoes, then slashed the soles of
his feet with a piece of broken bottle. The boy would recover, but he
wouldn’t be working anytime soon. Touching the bare flesh of his ankles
had filled Kaz with revulsion. He kept seeing the white bodies of the
Reaper ’s Barge, feeling the ripe bloat of Jordie’s skin beneath his hands.
The next evening, he returned to the den.
“I want a job,” he said. And he had one.
From there he’d worked and scraped and saved. He’d trailed the
professional thieves of the Barrel and learned how to pick pockets and how
to cut the laces on a lady’s purse. He did his first stint in jail, and then a
second. He quickly earned a reputation for being willing to take any job a
man needed done, and the name Dirtyhands soon followed. He was an
unskilled fighter, but a tenacious one.
“You have no finesse,” a gambler at the Silver Garter once said to him. “No
technique.”
“Sure I do,” Kaz had responded. “I practise the art of ‘pull his shirt over his
head and punch till you see blood.’”
He still went by Kaz, as he always had, but he stole the name Brekker off a
piece of machinery he’d seen on the docks. Rietveld, his family name, was
abandoned, cut away like a rotten limb. It was a country name, his last tie to
Jordie and his father and the boy he’d been. But he didn’t want Jakob
Hertzoon to see him coming.
He found out that the con Hertzoon had run on him and Jordie was a
common one. The coffeehouse and the house on Zelverstraat had been
nothing more than stage sets, used to fleece fools from the country. Filip
with his mechanical dogs had been the roper, used to draw Jordie in, while
Margit, Saskia, and the clerks at the trade office had all been shills in on the
scam. Even one of the bank officers had to have been in on it, passing
information to Hertzoon about their customers and tipping him off to
newcomers from the country opening accounts. Hertzoon had probably
been running the con on multiple marks at once. Jordie’s little fortune
wasn’t enough to justify such a set-up.
But the cruelest discovery was Kaz’s gift for cards. It might have made him
and Jordie rich. Once he learned a game, it took him mere hours to master
it, and then he simply couldn’t be beaten. He could remember every hand
that had been played, each bet that was made. He could keep track of the
deal for up to five decks. And if there was something he couldn’t recall, he
made up for it by cheating.
He’d never lost his love for sleight of hand, and he graduated from palming
coins to cards, cups, wallets, and watches. A good magician wasn’t much
different from a proper thief. Before long, he was banned from play in
every gambling hall on East Stave.
In each place he went, in each bar and flophouse and brothel and squat, he
asked after Jakob Hertzoon, but if anyone knew the name, they refused to
admit it.
Then, one day, Kaz was crossing a bridge over East Stave when he saw a
man with florid cheeks
and tufty sideburns entering a gin shop. He wasn’t wearing staid mercher
black any longer, but garish striped trousers and a maroon paisley vest. His
velvet coat was bottle green.
Kaz pushed through the crowd, mind buzzing, heart racing, unsure of what
he meant to do, but at the door to the shop, a giant bruiser in a bowler hat
stopped him with one meaty hand.
“Shop’s closed.”
“I can see it’s open.” Kaz’s voice sounded wrong to him – reedy, unfamiliar.
“You’ll have to wait.”
“I need to see Jakob Hertzoon.”
“Who?”
Kaz felt like he was about to climb out of his skin. He pointed through the
window. “Jakob fucking Hertzoon. I want to talk to him.”
The bruiser had looked at Kaz as if he were deranged. “Get your head
straight, lad,” he’d said.
“That ain’t no Hertzoon. That’s Pekka Rollins. Want to get anywhere in the
Barrel, you’d best learn his name.”
Kaz knew Pekka Rollins’ name. Everyone did. He’d just never seen the
man.
At that moment, Rollins turned towards the window. Kaz waited for
acknowledgement – a smirk, a sneer, some spark of recognition. But
Rollins’ eyes passed right over him. One more mark. One more cull. Why
would he remember?
Kaz had been courted by any number of gangs who liked his way with his
fists and the cards. He’d always said no. He’d come to the Barrel to find
Hertzoon and punish him, not to join some makeshift family. But learning
that his real target was Pekka Rollins changed everything. That night, he lay
awake on the floor of the squat he’d holed up in and thought of what he
wanted, of what would finally make things right for Jordie. Pekka Rollins
had taken everything from Kaz. If Kaz intended to do the same to Rollins,
he would need to become his equal and then his better, and he couldn’t do it
alone. He needed a gang, and not just any gang, but one that needed him.
The next day he’d walked into the Slat and asked Per Haskell if he could
use another soldier. He’d known even then, though: he’d start as a grunt,
but the Dregs would become his army.
Had all of those steps brought him here tonight? To these dark corridors? It
was hardly the vengeance he’d dreamed of.
The rows of cells stretched on and on, infinite, impossible. There was no
way he would find Rollins in time. But it was only impossible until it
wasn’t, until he sighted that big frame, that florid face through the grate in
an iron door. It was only impossible until he was standing in front of Pekka
Rollins’ cell.
He was on his side, sleeping. Someone had given him a bad beating. Kaz
watched the rise and fall of his chest.
How many times had Kaz seen Pekka since that first glimpse in the gin
shop? Never once had there been a flicker of recognition. Kaz wasn’t a boy
any longer; there was no reason Pekka should be able to see the child he’d
swindled in his features. But it made him furious every time their paths had
crossed. It wasn’t right. Pekka’s face – Hertzoon’s face – was indelible in
Kaz’s mind, carved there by a jagged blade.
Kaz hung back now, feeling the delicate weight of his lockpicks like an
insect cradled in his palm.
Wasn’t this what he wanted? To see Pekka brought low, humiliated,
miserable and hopeless, the best of his crew dead on pikes. Maybe this
could be enough. Maybe all he needed now was for Pekka to know exactly
who he was, exactly what he’d done. He could stage a little trial of his own,
pass sentence, and mete it out, too.
The Elderclock began to chime the three-quarter-hour. He should go. There
wasn’t much time left to get to the basement. Nina would be waiting for
him. They all would.
But he needed this. He’d fought for this. It wasn’t the way he’d imagined,
but maybe it made no difference. If Pekka Rollins was put to death by some
nameless Fjerdan executioner, then none of this would matter. Kaz would
have four million kruge, but Jordie would never have his revenge.
The lock on the door gave up easily to Kaz’s picks.
Pekka’s eyes opened, and he smiled. He hadn’t been sleeping at all.
“Hello, Brekker,” Rollins said. “Come to gloat?”
“Not exactly,” Kaz replied.
He let the door slam shut behind him.
PART 5
THE ICE DOES NOT FORGIVE
EIGHT BELLS
W here the hell is Kaz? Jesper bounced from foot to foot in front of the
incinerator, the dim clang of alarm bells filling his ears, rattling his
thoughts. Yellow Protocol? Red Protocol? He couldn’t remember which
was which. Their whole plan had been built around never hearing the sound
of an alarm.
Inej had secured a rope to the roof and dropped down a line for them to
climb. Jesper had sent the rest of the rope up with Wylan and Matthias,
along with a pair of shears he’d located in the laundry, and a crude
grappling hook he’d fashioned from the metal slats of a washboard. Then
he’d cleaned the spatter of rain and moisture from the floor of the refuse
room, and made sure there were no scraps of rope or other signs of their
presence. There was nothing left to do but wait – and panic when the alarm
started to ring.
He heard people shouting to each other, a hail of stomping boots through
the ceiling above. Any minute, some intuitive guards might venture down to
the basement. If they found Jesper by the incinerator, the route to the roof
would be obvious. He’d be damning not only himself but the others as well.
Come on, Kaz. I’m waiting on you. They all were. Nina had come charging
into the room only minutes before, gasping for breath.
“Go!” she’d cried. “What are you waiting for?”
“You!” Jesper shot back. But when he asked her where Kaz was, Nina’s
face had crumpled.
“I hoped he was with you.”
She’d vanished up the rope, grunting with effort, leaving Jesper standing
below, frozen with indecision. Had the guards captured Kaz? Was he
somewhere in the prison fighting for his life?
He’s Kaz Brekker. Even if they locked him up, Kaz could escape any cell,
any pair of shackles.
Jesper could leave the rope for him, pray the rain and the cooling
incinerator was enough to keep the bottom of it from burning away. But if
he just kept standing here like a podge, he’d give away their escape route,
and they’d all be doomed. There was nothing to do but climb.
Jesper grabbed the rope just as Kaz hurtled through the door. His shirt was
covered in blood, his dark hair a wild mess.
“Hurry,” he said without preamble.
A thousand questions crowded into Jesper ’s head, but he didn’t stop to ask
them. He swung out over the coals and started to climb. Rain was still
falling in a light patter from above, and he felt the rope tremble as Kaz took
hold beneath him. When Jesper looked down, he saw Kaz bracing himself
to sling the incinerator doors closed behind them.
Jesper put hand over hand, pulling himself up from knot to knot, his arms
beginning to ache, the rope cutting into his palms, bracing his feet against
the wall of the incinerator when he needed to, then recoiling at the heat of
the bricks. How had Inej made this climb with nothing to hold on to?
High above, the Elderclock’s alarm bells still clanged like a drawer full of
angry pots and pans.
What had gone wrong? Why had Kaz and Nina been separated? And how
were they going to get out
of this?
Jesper shook his head, trying to blink the rain from his eyes, muscles
bunching in his back as he rose higher.
“Thank the Saints,” he gasped when Matthias and Wylan grabbed his
shoulders and hauled him up
the last few feet. He tumbled over the lip of the chimney and onto the roof,
drenched and trembling like a half-drowned kitten. “Kaz is on the rope.”
Matthias and Wylan seized the rope to pull him up. Jesper wasn’t sure how
much Wylan was actually helping, but he was certainly working hard. They
dragged Kaz out of the shaft. He flopped onto his back, gulping air.
“Where’s Inej?” he gasped. “Where’s Nina?”
“Already on the embassy roof,” said Matthias.
“Leave this rope and take the rest,” Kaz said. “Let’s move.”
Matthias and Wylan tossed the incinerator rope into a grimy heap and
grabbed two clean coils.
Jesper took one and forced himself to his feet. He followed Kaz to the lip of
the roof where Inej had secured a tether that ran from the top of the prison
to the embassy sector roof below. Someone had rigged up a sling for those
without the Wraith’s particular gift for flouting gravity.
“Thank the Saints, Djel, and your Aunt Eva,” Jesper said gratefully, and slid
down the rope, followed by the others.
The roof of the embassy was curved, probably to keep the snow off, but it
was a bit like walking on the humped back of an enormous whale. It was
also decidedly more … porous than the prison roof. It was pocked with
multiple points of entry – vents, chimneys, small glass domes designed to
let in the light. Nina and Inej were tucked up against the base of the biggest
dome, a filigreed skylight that overlooked the embassy’s entry rotunda. It
didn’t offer much shelter from the dwindling rain, but should any of the
guards on the ringwall turn their attention away from the approach road and
onto the rooftops of the Court, the crew would be hidden from view.
Nina had Inej’s feet in her lap.
“I can’t get all the rubber off her heels,” she said, as she saw them
approaching.
“Help her,” said Kaz.
“Me?” Jesper said. “You don’t mean—”
“Do it.”
Jesper crawled over to get a better look at Inej’s blistered feet, keenly aware
of Kaz tracking his movements. Kaz’s reaction the last time Inej was
injured had been more than a little disturbing, though this wasn’t nearly as
bad as a stab wound – and this time Kaz didn’t have the Black Tips to
blame. Jesper focused on the particles of rubber, trying to draw them away
from Inej’s flesh the same way he’d extracted ore from the prison bars.
Inej knew his secret, but Nina was gaping at him. “You’re a Fabrikator?”
“Would you believe me if I said no?”
“Why didn’t you tell me?”
“You never asked?” he said lamely.
“Jesper—”
“Just leave it alone, Nina.” She pressed her lips together, but he knew this
wasn’t the last he’d hear of it. He made himself refocus on Inej’s feet.
“Saints,” he said.
Inej grimaced. “That bad?”
“No, you just have really ugly feet.”
“Ugly feet that got you on this roof.”
“But are we stuck here?” asked Nina. The Elderclock ceased its ringing,
and in the silence that followed, she shut her eyes in relief. “Finally.”
“What happened at the prison?” Wylan said, that panicked crackle back in
his voice. “What triggered the alarm?”
“I ran into two guards,” said Nina.
Jesper glanced up from his work. “You didn’t put them down?”
“I did. But one of them got off a few shots. Another guard came running.
That was when the bells started.”
“Damn. So that’s what set off the alarm?”
“Maybe,” said Nina. “Where were you, Kaz? I wouldn’t have been in the
stairwell if I hadn’t wasted time looking for you. Why didn’t you meet me
on the landing?”
Kaz was peering down through the glass of the dome. “I decided to search
the cells on the fifth floor, too.”
They all stared at him. Jesper felt his temper beginning to fray.
“What the hell is this?” he said. “You take off before Matthias and I get
back, then you just decide to expand your search and leave Nina thinking
you’re in trouble?”
“There was something I needed to take care of.”
“Not good enough.”
“I had a hunch,” Kaz said. “I followed it.”
Nina’s expression was pure disbelief. “A hunch?”
“I made a mistake,” growled Kaz. “All right?”
“No,” said Inej calmly. “You owe us an explanation.”
After a moment, Kaz said, “I went looking for Pekka Rollins.” A look
passed between Kaz and Inej that Jesper didn’t understand; there was
knowledge in it that he’d been locked out of.
“For Saints’ sake, why?” asked Nina.
“I wanted to know who in the Dregs leaked information to him.”
Jesper waited. “And?”
“I couldn’t find him.”
“What about the blood on your shirt?” Matthias asked.
“Run in with a guard.”
Jesper didn’t believe it.
Kaz ran a hand over his eyes. “I screwed up. I made a bad call, and I
deserve the blame for it. But that doesn’t change our situation.”
“What is our situation?” Nina asked Matthias. “What will they do now?”
“The alarm was Yellow Protocol, a sector disturbance.”
Jesper pushed at his temples. “I don’t remember what that means.”
“My guess is that they think someone’s attempting a prison break. That
sector is already sealed off from the rest of the Ice Court, so they’ll
authorise a search, probably try to figure out who’s missing from the cells.”
“They’ll find the people we knocked out in the women’s and men’s holding
areas,” said Wylan.
“We need to get out of here. Forget Bo Yul-Bayur.”
Matthias cut a dismissive hand through the air. “It’s too late. If the guards
think there’s a prison break in progress, the checkpoints will be on high
alert. They’re not going to let anyone just walk through.”
“We could still try,” said Jesper. “We get Inej’s feet patched up—”
She flexed them, then stood, testing her bare soles on the gravel. “They feel
all right. My calluses are gone, though.”
“I’ll give you an address where you can mail your complaints,” Nina said
with a wink.
“Okay, the Wraith is ambulatory,” Jesper said, rubbing a sleeve over his
damp face. The rain had faded away to a light mist. “We find a cosy room
to bash some partygoers on the head and waltz out of this place decked in
their finest.”
“Past the embassy gate and two checkpoints?” Matthias said skeptically.
“They don’t know anyone escaped the prison sector. They saw Nina and
Kaz so they know people
are out of their cells, but the guards at the checkpoints are going to be
looking for hoodlums in prison clothes, not sweet-smelling diplos in fancy
dress. We have to do this before they get wise to the fact that six people are
on the loose in the outer circle.”
“Forget it,” said Nina. “I came here to find Bo Yul-Bayur, and I’m not
leaving without him.”
“What’s the point?” said Wylan. “Even if you manage to get to the White
Island and find Yul-Bayur, we’ll have no way out. Jesper ’s right: We
should go now while we still have a chance.”
Nina folded her arms. “If I have to cross to the White Island alone, I will.”
“That may not be an option,” said Matthias. “Look.”
They gathered around the base of the glass dome. The rotunda below was a
mass of people, drinking, laughing, greeting each other, a kind of raucous
party before the celebrations on the White Island.
As they watched, a group of new guards pushed into the room, trying to
form the crowd into lines.
“They’re adding another checkpoint,” Matthias said. “They’re going to
review everyone’s identification again before they allow people access to
the glass bridge.”
“Because of Yellow Protocol?” asked Jesper.
“Probably. A precaution.”
It was like seeing the last bit of their luck drain from a glass.
“Then that decides it,” said Jesper. “We cut our losses and try to get out
now.”
“I know a way,” Inej said quietly. They all turned to look at her. The yellow
light from the dome pooled in her dark eyes. “We can get through that
checkpoint and onto the White Island.” She pointed below to where two
groups of people had entered the rotunda from the gatehouse courtyard and
were shaking the mist from their clothes. The girls from the House of the
Blue Iris were easily identified by the colour of their gowns and the flowers
displayed in their hair and at their necklines. And no one could mistake the
men of the Anvil – extensive tattoos on proud display, arms bare despite the
chilly weather. “The West Stave delegations have started to arrive. We can
get in.”
“Inej—” said Kaz.
“Nina and I can get inside,” she continued. Her back was straight, her tone
steady. She looked like someone facing the firing squad and saying damn
the blindfolds. “We enter with the Menagerie.”
EIGHT BELLS AND HALF CHIME
Kaz was watching her intently, his bitter coffee eyes glittering in the light
from the dome.
“You know those costumes,” she said. “Heavy cloaks, hoods. That’s all the
Fjerdans will see. A Zemeni fawn. A Kaelish mare.” She swallowed and
forced the next words past her lips. “A Suli lynx.”
Not people, not even really girls, just lovely objects to be collected. I’ve
always wanted to tumble a Zemeni girl, a customer would whisper. A
Kaelish girl with red hair. A Suli girl with burnt caramel skin.
“It’s a risk,” said Kaz.
“What job isn’t?”
“Kaz, how are you and Matthias going to get through?” asked Nina. “We
might need you for locks, and if things go bad on the island, I don’t want to
be stranded. I doubt you can pass yourselves off as members of the
Menagerie.”
“That shouldn’t be a problem,” said Kaz. “Helvar ’s been holding out on
us.”
“Have you?” asked Inej.
“It’s not—” Matthias dragged a hand over his cropped hair. “How do you
know these things, demjin?” he growled at Kaz.
“Logic. The whole Ice Court is a masterpiece of fail-safes and doubled
systems. That glass bridge is impressive, but in an emergency, there would
have to be another way to get reinforcements to the White Island and get
the royal family out.”
“Yes,” said Matthias in exasperation. “There’s another way to the White
Island. But it’s messy.” He glanced at Nina. “And it certainly can’t be done
in a gown.”
“Hold on,” Jesper interrupted. “Who cares if you can all get onto the White
Island? Let’s say Nina sparkles Yul-Bayur ’s location out of some Fjerdan
higher-up, and you get him back here. We’ll be trapped. By then, the prison
guards will have completed their search and are going to know six inmates
got out of the sector somehow. Any chance we have of making it through
the embassy gates and the checkpoints will be gone.”
Kaz peered past the dome to the embassy’s open courtyard and the ringwall
gatehouse beyond.
“Wylan, how hard would it be to disable one of these gates?”
“To get it open?”
“No, to keep it closed.”
“You mean break it?” Wylan shrugged. “I don’t think it would be too
difficult. I couldn’t see the mechanism when we entered the prison gate, but
from the layout, I’m guessing it’s pretty standard.”
“Pulleys, cogs, some really big screws?”
“Well, yes, and a sizeable winch. The cables wrap around it like a big spool,
and the guards just turn it with some kind of handle or wheel.”
“I know how a winch works. Can you take one apart?”
“I think so, but it’s the alarm system the cables are attached to that’s
complicated. I doubt I could do it without triggering Black Protocol.”
“Good,” said Kaz. “Then that’s what we’ll do.”
Jesper held up a hand. “I’m sorry, isn’t Black Protocol the thing we want to
avoid at all costs?”
“I do seem to remember something about certain doom,” said Nina.
“Not if we use it against them. Tonight, most of the Court’s security is
concentrated on the White Island and right here at the embassy. When
Black Protocol sounds, the glass bridge will shut down, trapping all those
guards on the island along with the guests.”
“But what about Matthias’ route off the island?” asked Nina.
“They can’t move a major force that way,” Matthias conceded. “At least not
quickly.”
Kaz gazed out at the White Island, head tilted, eyes slightly unfocused.
“Scheming face,” Inej murmured.
Jesper nodded. “Definitely.”
She was going to miss that look.
“Three gates in the ringwall,” Kaz said. “The prison gate is already locked
up tight because of Yellow Protocol. The embassy gate is a bottleneck
crammed with guests – the Fjerdans aren’t going to get troops through
there. Jesper, that just leaves the gate in the drüskelle sector for you and
Wylan to handle. You use it to engage Black Protocol, then wreck it. Break
it badly enough that any guards who manage to mobilise can’t get out to
follow us.”
“I’m all for locking the Fjerdans in their own ‘fortress’,” said Jesper. “Truly.
But how do we get out? Once we trigger Black Protocol, you guys will be
trapped on that island, and we’ll be trapped in the outer circle. We have no
weapons and no demo materials.”
Kaz’s grin was sharp as a razor. “Thank goodness we’re proper thieves.
We’re going to do a little shopping – and it’s all going on Fjerda’s tab.
Inej,” he said, “let’s start with something shiny.”
Beside the big glass dome, Kaz laid out the details of what he had in mind.
If the old plan had been daring, it had at least been built on stealth. The new
plan was audacious, maybe even mad. They wouldn’t just be announcing
their presence to the Fjerdans, they’d be trumpeting it. Again, the crew
would be separated, and again, they would time their movements to the
chiming of the Elderclock, but now there would be even less room for error.
Inej searched her heart, expecting to find caution there, fear. But all she felt
was ready. This wasn’t a job she was performing to pay off her debt to Per
Haskell. It wasn’t a task to be accomplished for Kaz or the Dregs. She
wanted this – the money, the dream it would help to secure.
While Kaz explained, and Jesper used the laundry shears to portion out
pieces of rope, Wylan helped Inej and Nina prepare. To pass as members of
the Menagerie, they would need tattoos. They started with Nina. Using one
of Kaz’s lockpicks and copper pyrite Jesper had extracted from the roof,
Wylan traced his best imitation of the Menagerie feather on Nina’s arm,
following Inej’s description and making corrections as needed. Then Nina
sank the ink into her own flesh. A Corporalnik didn’t need a tattoo needle.
Nina did her best to smoothe the scars on Inej’s forearm. The work wasn’t
perfect, but they were short on time and Nina’s calling wasn’t as a tailor.
Wylan sketched a second peacock feather over Inej’s skin.
Nina paused, “You’re sure?”
Inej took a deep breath. “It’s warpaint,” she said, both to Nina and herself.
“It’s my mark to take.”
“It’s also temporary,” Nina promised. “I’ll remove it as soon as we’re in the
harbour.”
The harbour. Inej thought of the Ferolind with its cheerful flags, and tried to
hold that image in her head as she watched the peacock feather sink into her
skin.
The finished tattoos wouldn’t bear up under any kind of close scrutiny, but
hopefully they would do.
Finally, they stood. Inej had predicted that the Menagerie would arrive late
– Tante Heleen loved to make an entrance – but they still needed to be in
position and ready to move when the time came.
And yet, they hesitated. The knowledge that they might never see each
other again, that some of them – maybe all of them – might not survive this
night hung heavy in the air. A gambler, a convict, a wayward son, a lost
Grisha, a Suli girl who had become a killer, a boy from the Barrel who had
become something worse.
Inej looked at her strange crew, barefoot and shivering in their soot-stained
prison uniforms, their features limned by the golden light of the dome,
softened by the mist that hung in the air.
What bound them together? Greed? Desperation? Was it just the knowledge
that if one or all of them disappeared tonight, no one would come looking?
Inej’s mother and father might still shed tears for the daughter they’d lost,
but if Inej died tonight, there would be no one to grieve for the girl she was
now. She had no family, no parents or siblings, only people to fight beside.
Maybe that was something to be grateful for, too.
It was Jesper who spoke first. “No mourners,” he said with a grin.
“No funerals,” they replied in unison. Even Matthias muttered the words
softly.
“If any of you survive, make sure I have an open casket,” Jesper said as he
hefted two slender coils of rope over his shoulder and signalled for Wylan
to follow him across the roof. “The world deserves a few more moments
with this face.”
Inej was only slightly surprised to see the intensity of the look that passed
between Matthias and Nina. Something had changed between them after the
battle with the Shu, but Inej couldn’t be sure what.
Matthias cleared his throat and gave Nina an awkward little bow. “A
word?” he asked.
Nina returned the bow with considerably more panache, and let him lead
her away. Inej was glad; she wanted a moment with Kaz.
“I have something for you,” she said as she pulled his leather gloves from
the sleeve of her prison tunic.
He stared at them. “How—”
“I got them from the discarded clothes. Before I made the climb.”
“Six storeys in the dark.”
She nodded. She wasn’t going to wait for thanks. Not for the climb, or the
gloves, or for anything ever again.
He pulled the gloves on slowly, and she watched his pale, vulnerable hands
disappear beneath the leather. They were trickster hands – long, graceful
fingers made for prying open locks, hiding coins,
making things vanish.
“When we get back to Ketterdam, I’m taking my share, and I’m leaving the
Dregs.”
He looked away. “You should. You were always too good for the Barrel.”
It was time to go. “Saints’ speed, Kaz.”
Kaz snagged her wrist. “Inej.” His gloved thumb moved over her pulse,
traced the top of the feather tattoo. “If we don’t make it out, I want you to
know …”
She waited. She felt hope rustling its wings inside her, ready to take flight at
the right words from Kaz. She willed that hope into stillness. Those words
would never come. The heart is an arrow.
She reached up and touched his cheek. She thought he might flinch again,
even knock her hand away. In nearly two years of battling side by side with
Kaz, of late-night scheming, impossible heists, clandestine errands, and
harried meals of fried potatoes and hutspot gobbled down as they rushed
from one place to another, this was the first time she had touched him skin
to skin, without the barrier of gloves or coat or shirtsleeve. She let her hand
cup his cheek. His skin was cool and damp from the rain. He stayed still,
but she saw a tremor pass through him, as if he were waging a war with
himself.
“If we don’t survive this night, I will die unafraid, Kaz. Can you say the
same?”
His eyes were nearly black, the pupils dilated. She could see it took every
last bit of his terrible will for him to remain still beneath her touch. And yet,
he did not pull away. She knew it was the best he could offer. It was not
enough.
She dropped her hand. He took a deep breath.
Kaz had said he didn’t want her prayers and she wouldn’t speak them, but
she wished him safe nonetheless. She had her aim now, her heart had
direction, and though it hurt to know that path led away from him, she
could endure it.
Inej joined Nina at the edge of the dome to await the arrival of the
Menagerie. The dome was wide and shallow, all silver filigree and glass.
Inej saw there was a mosaic on the floor of the vast rotunda below. It
appeared in brief flashes between partygoers – two wolves chasing each
other, destined to move in circles for as long as the Ice Court stood.
The guests entering through the grand archway were being shepherded into
rooms off the rotunda in small groups to be searched for weapons. Inej saw
guards emerge with little piles of brooches, porcupine quills, even sashes
that Inej assumed must contain metal or wire.
“You don’t have to do this, you know,” said Nina. “You don’t have to put
those silks on again.”
“I’ve done worse.”
“I know. You scaled six storeys of hell for us.”
“That’s not what I meant.”
Nina paused. “I know that, too.” She hesitated, then said, “Is the haul so
important to you?” Inej was surprised to hear what sounded like guilt in
Nina’s voice.
The Elderclock began to chime nine bells. Inej looked down at the wolves
chasing each other around the rotunda floor. “I’m not sure why I began
this,” she admitted. “But I know why I have to finish. I know why fate
brought me here, why it placed me in the path of this prize.”
She was being vague, but she wasn’t yet ready to speak the dream that had
ignited in her heart – a crew of her own, a ship under her command, a
crusade. It felt like something that was meant to be kept secret, a new seed
that might grow to something extraordinary if it wasn’t forced to bloom too
soon. She didn’t even know how to sail. And yet a part of her wanted to tell
Nina all of it. If Nina didn’t choose to go back to Ravka, a Heartrender
would be an excellent addition to her crew.
“They’re here,” Nina said.
The girls of the Menagerie entered through the rotunda doors in a wedge
formation, their gowns glittering in the candlelight, the hoods of their capes
shadowing their faces. Each hood was fashioned to represent an animal – a
Zemeni fawn with soft ears and delicate white spots, a Kaelish mare with an
auburn topknot, a Shu serpent with beaded red scales, a Ravkan fox, a
leopard from the Southern Colonies, a raven, an ermine, and of course the
Suli lynx. The tall blonde girl who played the role of the Fjerdan wolf in
silvery furs was notably absent.
They were met by uniformed female guards.
“I don’t see her,” said Nina.
“Just wait. The Peacock will enter last.”
And sure enough, there she was: Heleen Van Houden, shimmering in teal
satin, an elaborate ruff of peacock feathers framing her golden head.
“Subtle,” said Nina.
“Subtle doesn’t sell in the Barrel.”
Inej gave a high, trilling whistle. Jesper ’s whistle came back from
somewhere in the distance. This is it, Inej thought. She’d shoved, and now
the boulder was rolling down the hill. Who knew what damage it might do
and what might be built on the rubble?
Nina squinted down through the glass. “How does she keep from collapsing
under the weight of
those diamonds? They can’t possibly be real.”
“Oh, they’re real,” said Inej. Those jewels had been purchased with the
sweat and blood and sorrow of girls like her.
The guards divided the members of the Menagerie into three groups, while
Heleen was escorted
separately. The Peacock would never be expected to turn out her clothes
and lift her skirts in front of her girls.
“Them,” Inej said, pointing to the group that included the Suli lynx and
Kaelish mare. They were heading to the doors on the left of the rotunda.
As Nina tracked the group with her eyes, Inej moved over the roof,
following their trajectory.
“Which door?” she called.
“Third on the right,” Nina said. Inej moved to the nearest air duct and lifted
the grate. It would be a tight squeeze for Nina, but they’d manage. She slid
down into the ventilation duct, crouching and moving along the narrow
shaft between rooms. Behind her, she heard a grunt and then a loud whump
as Nina hit the bottom of the shaft like a sack of laundry. Inej winced.
Hopefully the noises of the crowd below would lend them cover. Or maybe
the Ice Court had really big rats.
They crawled along, peering in vents as they went. Finally, they were
looking down into some kind of small meeting room that had been
commandeered for the purpose of guards searching guests.
The Exotics had removed their capes and laid them on the long oval table.
One of the blonde guards was patting the girls down, feeling along the
seams and hems of their costumes, and even poking fingers into their hair,
while the other guard kept watch with her hand resting on her rifle. She
looked ill at ease with the gun. Inej knew Fjerdans didn’t let women serve
in the army in a combat capacity. Maybe the female guards had been
conscripted from some other unit.
Inej and Nina waited until the guards had finished searching the girls, their
capes, and their little beaded purses.
“Ven tidder,” one of the guards said as they exited the room to let the
Menagerie girls set themselves to rights.
“Five minutes,” translated Nina in a whisper.
“Go,” said Inej.
“I need you to move.”
“Why?”
“Because I need a clear line of sight, and right now all I can see is your
ass.”
Inej wiggled forwards so Nina had a better view through the vent, and a
moment later, she heard four soft thuds as the Menagerie girls collapsed on
the dark blue carpet.
Quickly, she wrenched the grate loose and dropped onto the shiny surface
of the table. Nina tumbled down after her, landing in a heap.
“Sorry,” she moaned as she dragged herself upright.
Inej almost laughed. “You’re very graceful in battle, just not when you’re
plummeting.”
“Missed that day in school.”
They stripped the Suli and Kaelish girls down to their underclothes, then
bound all the girls’ wrists and ankles with cords from the curtains and
gagged them with torn pieces of their prison clothes.
“Clock is ticking,” said Inej.
“Sorry,” Nina whispered to the Kaelish girl. Inej knew that ordinarily Nina
would have used pigments to alter her own hair colour, but there simply
wasn’t time. Nina bled the girl’s bright red colour directly from the strands
of her hair into Nina’s own, leaving the poor Kaelish with a mop of white
waves that looked vaguely rusty in places, and Nina with hair that wasn’t
quite Kaelish red.
Nina’s eyes were green and not blue, but that kind of tailoring couldn’t be
rushed, so they’d have to do. She took white powder from the girl’s beaded
bag and did her best to pale her skin.
As Nina worked, Inej dragged the other girls into a tall silverwood cabinet
on the far wall, arranging their limbs so that there would be room for the
Kaelish. She felt a stab of guilt as she made sure the Suli girl’s gag was
secure. Tante Heleen must have bought her to replace Inej; she had the same
bronze skin, the same thick sheaf of dark hair. She was built differently,
though, soft and curving instead of lean and angular. Maybe she’d come to
Tante Heleen of her own free will. Maybe she’d chosen this life. Inej hoped
that was true.
“Saints protect you,” Inej whispered to the unconscious girl.
A rap came at the door and a voice spoke in Fjerdan.
“They need the room for the next girls,” Nina whispered.
Inej and Nina shoved the Kaelish into the cupboard and managed to get the
doors closed and locked, then yanked on their costumes. Inej was glad she
didn’t have time to dwell on the unwelcome familiarity of the silks on her
skin, the horrible tinkling of the bells on her anklets. They swept on their
capes and took a quick glance in the mirror.
Neither of the costumes fit properly. Inej’s purple silks were far too loose,
and as for Nina …
“What the hell is this supposed to be?” she said, looking down at herself.
The plunging gown barely covered her substantial cleavage and clung
tightly to her buttocks. It had been wrought to look like blue-green scales,
giving way to a shimmering chiffon fan.
“Maybe a mermaid?” suggested Inej. “Or a wave?”
“I thought I was a horse.”
“Well they weren’t going to put you in a dress of hooves.”
Nina smoothed her hands over the ridiculous costume. “I’m about to be
very popular.”
“I wonder what Matthias would have to say about that outfit.”
“He wouldn’t approve.”
“He doesn’t approve of anything about you. But when you laugh, he perks
up like a tulip in fresh water.”
Nina snorted. “Matthias the tulip.”
“The big, brooding, yellow tulip.”
“Are you ready?” Nina asked as they pulled their hoods far down over their
faces.
“Yes.” Inej said, and she meant it. “We’ll need a distraction. They’re going
to notice four girls went in and only two are coming out.”
“Leave it to me. And watch your hem.”
As soon as they opened the door to the hallway, the guards were waving
them over impatiently.
Beneath her cape, Nina flicked her fingers hard. One of the guards bleated
as her nose began to gush blood down the front of her uniform in absurdly
forceful gouts. The other guard recoiled, but in the next instant, she
clutched her stomach. Nina was twisting her wrist in a roiling motion,
sending waves of nausea through the woman’s system.
“Your hem,” Nina repeated calmly.
Inej barely had time to gather up her cape before the guard bent double and
heaved her dinner over the tiled floor. The guests in the hallway shrieked
and shoved at each other, trying to get away from the mess. Nina and Inej
sailed by, emitting appropriate squeals of disgust.
“The nosebleed probably would have done the trick,” whispered Inej.
“Best to be thorough.”
“If I didn’t know any better, I’d think you liked making Fjerdans suffer.”
They kept their heads down and entered the swell of people filling the
rotunda, ignoring the Zemeni fawn who tried to direct them to the other side
of the room. It was essential that they not get too close to any of the real
Menagerie girls. Inej only wished the cloaks weren’t so easy to track
through a crowd.
“This one,” Inej said, steering Nina into a line far from the other members
of the Menagerie. It seemed to be moving a bit faster. But when they
reached the front of the line, Inej wondered if she’d chosen poorly. This
guard seemed even more stern-faced and humourless than the others. He
held his hand out for Nina’s papers and scrutinised them with cold blue
eyes.
“This description says you have freckles,” he said in Kerch.
“I do,” said Nina smoothly. “They’re just not visible right now. Want to
see?”
“No,” the Fjerdan said icily. “You’re taller than described here.”
“Boots,” Nina said. “I like to be able to look a man in the eye. You have
very pretty eyes.”
He looked at the paper, then took in her ensemble. “You’re heavier than it
says on this paper, I’ll wager.”
She shrugged artfully, the scales of her neckline slipping lower. “I like to
eat when I’m in the mood,” she said, puckering her lips shamelessly. “And
I’m always in the mood.”
Inej struggled to keep a straight face. If Nina resorted to eyelash batting, she
knew she would lose the fight and burst out laughing. But the Fjerdan
seemed to be eating it up. Maybe Nina had a stupefying effect on all
stalwart northerners.
“Move along,” he said gruffly. Then added, “I … I may be at the party
later.”
Nina ran a finger down his arm. “I’ll save you a dance.”
He grinned like a fool, then cleared his throat, and his stern expression fell
back into place. Saints, Inej thought, it must be exhausting to be so stolid all
the time. He glanced cursorily at Inej’s papers, his mind still clearly on the
prospect of unwrapping Nina’s layers of blue-green chiffon. He waved her
past, but as Inej stepped forwards she stumbled.
“Wait,” said the guard.
She stopped. Nina looked back over her shoulder.
“What’s wrong with your shoes?”
“Just a bit big,” said Inej. “They stretched more than expected.”
“Show me your arms,” the guard said.
“Why?”
“Just do it,” the guard said harshly.
Inej pulled her arms free of the cloak and held them out, displaying the
lumpy peacock feather tattoo.
A guard in captain’s stripes wandered over. “What is it?”
“She’s Suli, for sure, and she has the Menagerie tattoo, but it doesn’t look
quite right.”
Inej shrugged. “I got a bad burn as a child.”
The captain gestured to a group of annoyed-looking partygoers gathered
near the entry and surrounded by guards. “Anyone suspicious goes over
there. Put her with them, and we’ll take her back to the checkpoint to have
her papers reviewed.”
“I’ll miss the party,” said Inej.
The guard ignored her, seizing her arm and pulling her back towards the
entry as the other people in line stared and whispered. Her heart began to
pound.
Nina’s face was frightened, pale even beneath her powder, but there was
nothing Inej could say to reassure her. She gave her the briefest nod. Go,
she thought silently. It’s up to you now.
NINE BELLS
“What if I say no, Brekker?” It was mere posturing, Matthias knew that.
The time for protest had long passed. They were already jogging down the
gentle slope of the embassy roof towards the drüskelle sector, Wylan
panting from exertion, Jesper loping along with ease, and Brekker keeping
pace despite his crooked gait and lack of cane. But Matthias disliked how
well this low thief could read him. “What if I don’t give you this last bit of
myself and my honour?”
“You will, Helvar. Nina is on her way to the White Island right now. Are
you really going to leave her stranded?”
“You presume a great deal.”
“Seems like the perfect amount to me.”
“These are the law courts, right?” Jesper said as they raced over the roof,
catching glimpses of the elegant courtyards below, each built around a
burbling fountain and dotted with rustling ice willows.
“I guess if you’re going to be sentenced to death, this isn’t a bad place for
it.”
“Water everywhere,” said Wylan. “Do the fountains symbolise Djel?”
“The wellspring,” mused Kaz, “where all sins are washed clean.”
“Or where they drown you and make you confess,” Wylan said.
Jesper snorted. “Wylan, your thoughts have taken a very dark turn. I fear
the Dregs may be a bad influence.”
They used a doubled segment of rope and the grappling hook to cross to the
roof of the drüskelle sector. Wylan had to be looped into a sling, but Jesper
and Kaz moved easily across the rope, hand over hand, with unnerving
speed. Matthias approached with more caution, and though he didn’t show
it, he did not like the way the rope creaked and bowed with his own weight.
The others pulled him onto the stone of the drüskelle roof, and as Matthias
stood, he was struck by a wave of vertigo. More than any place in the Ice
Court, more than any place in the world, this felt like home to him. But it
was home turned on its head, his life viewed at the wrong angle. Peering
into the dark, he saw the massive pyramid skylights that marked the roof.
He had the disconcerting sense that if he looked through the glass he would
see himself running drills in the training rooms, seated at the long table in
the dining hall.
In the distance, he heard the wolves barking and yapping in their kennel by
the gatehouse, wondering where their masters had gone for the night.
Would they recognise him if he approached with an outstretched hand? He
wasn’t sure he recognised himself. On the northern ice, his choices had
seemed clear. But now his thoughts were muddied with these thugs and
thieves, with Inej’s courage and Jesper ’s daring, and with Nina, always
Nina. He couldn’t deny the relief he’d felt when she’d emerged from the
incinerator shaft, dishevelled and gasping, frightened but alive. When he
and Wylan had pulled her out of the flue, he’d had to force himself to let her
go.
No, he would not look through those skylights. He could afford no more
weakness, especially on this night. It was time to move forwards.
They reached the lip of the roof overlooking the ice moat. From here it
looked solid, its surface polished bright as a mirror and illuminated by the
guard towers on the White Island. But the moat’s waters were ever shifting,
concealed only by a wafer-thin skin of frost.
Kaz secured another coil of rope to the roof’s edge and prepared to rappel
down to the shore.
“You know what to do,” he said to Jesper and Wylan. “Eleven bells and not
before.”
“When have I ever been early?” asked Jesper.
Kaz braced himself for the descent and vanished over the side. Matthias
followed, hands gripping the rope, bare feet pressed against the wall. When
he glanced up, he saw Wylan and Jesper gazing down at him. But the next
time he looked, they were gone.
The shore surrounding the ice moat was little more than a slender, slippery
rind of white stone.
Kaz perched there, pressed against the wall and frowning out at the moat.
“How do we cross? I don’t see anything.”
“Because you are not worthy.”
“I’m also not near-sighted. There’s nothing there.”
Matthias began edging along the wall, running his hand over the stone at
hip level. “On Hringkälla the drüskelle finish our initiation,” he said. “We
go from aspirant to novice drüskelle in the ceremony at the sacred ash.”
“Where the tree talks to you.”
Matthias resisted the urge to shove him into the water. “Where we hope to
hear the voice of Djel.
But that’s the final step. First, we have to cross the ice moat undetected. If
we are judged worthy, Djel shows us the path.”
In truth, elder drüskelle simply passed the secret of the crossing along to
aspirants they wished to see enter the order; it was a way of culling the
weak or those who had simply not meshed successfully with the group. If
you’d made friends, if you’d proven yourself, then one of the brothers
would take you aside and tell you that on the night of the initiation, you
should go to the shore of the ice moat and run your hand along the wall of
the drüskelle sector. At its centre, you would find an etching of a wolf that
marked the location of another glass bridge – not grand and arching like the
one that spanned the moat from the embassy wing, but flat, level, and only a
few feet wide. It lay just under the frozen skin of the surface, invisible if
you didn’t know to look for it. Commander Brum himself had been the one
to tell Matthias how to find the secret bridge, as well as the trick for
crossing it undetected.
It took Matthias two passes along the wall before his fingers found the
carved lines of the wolf. He rested his hand there briefly, feeling the
traditions that connected him to the order of drüskelle, as old as the Ice
Court itself.
“Here,” he said.
Kaz shuffled over and squinted across the moat. He leaned out and Matthias
yanked him back.
He pointed to the guard towers on the top of the wall surrounding the White
Island. “You’ll be visible,” he said. “Use this.”
He scraped his hand along the wall and his palm came away white. The
night of his initiation, Matthias had rubbed his clothes and hair with the
same chalky powder. Camouflaged from the view of the guards in their
towers, he’d crossed the slender path to the island to meet his brothers.
Now he and Kaz did the same, though Matthias noticed Kaz tucked his
gloves neatly away first. Inej must have returned them.
Matthias stepped onto the secret bridge, then heard Kaz hiss when the icy
waters of the moat closed over his feet.
“Chilly, Brekker?”
“If only we had time for a swim. Get moving.”
Despite his taunts to Kaz, by the time they were halfway to the island,
Matthias’ feet had gone almost completely numb, and he was keenly aware
of the guard towers high above the moat.
Drüskelle would have come this way earlier tonight. He’d never heard of
any aspirant being spotted or shot at on the bridge, but anything was
possible.
“All this to be a witchhunter?” Kaz said behind him. “The Dregs need a
better initiation.”
“This is only one part of Hringkälla.”
“Yes, I know, then a tree tells you the secret handshake.”
“I feel sorry for you, Brekker. There is nothing sacred in your life.”
There was a long pause, and then Kaz said, “You’re wrong.”
The outer wall of the White Island loomed up before them, covered in a
rippling pattern of scales.
It took a moment to locate the ridge of scales that hid the gate. Only a short
while ago, drüskelle would have been gathered in this niche of the wall to
welcome their new brothers ashore, but now it was empty, the iron grating
chained. Kaz made quick work of the lock, and soon they were in a slender
passage that would lead them to the gardens that backed the barracks of the
royal guard.
“Were you always good at locks?”
“No.”
“How did you learn?”
“The way you learn about anything. Take it apart.”
“And the magic tricks?”
Kaz snorted. “So you don’t think I’m a demon any more?”
“I know you’re a demon, but your tricks are human.”
“Some people see a magic trick and say, ‘Impossible!’ They clap their
hands, turn over their money, and forget about it ten minutes later. Other
people ask how it worked. They go home, get into bed, toss and turn,
wondering how it was done. It takes them a good night’s sleep to forget all
about it.
And then there are the ones who stay awake, running through the trick
again and again, looking for that skip in perception, the crack in the illusion
that will explain how their eyes got duped; they’re the kind who won’t rest
until they’ve mastered that little bit of mystery for themselves. I’m that
kind.”
“You love trickery.”
“I love puzzles. Trickery is just my native tongue.”
“The gardens,” Matthias said, pointing to the hedges up ahead. “We can
follow them all the way round to the ballroom.”
Just as they were about to emerge from the passage, two guards rounded the
corner – both in black and silver drüskelle uniforms, both carrying rifles.
“Perjenger! ” one of them shouted in surprise. Prisoners. “Sten! ”
Without thinking, Matthias said, “Desjenet, Djel comenden! ” Stand down,
Djel wills it so. They were the words of a drüskelle commanding officer,
and he delivered them with all the authority he’d ever learned to muster.
The soldiers exchanged a confused glance. That moment of hesitation was
enough. Matthias grabbed the first soldier ’s rifle and head-butted him hard.
The drüskelle collapsed.
Kaz slammed into the other soldier, knocking him over. The drüskelle kept
hold of his rifle, but Kaz slipped behind him and brought his forearm across
the soldier ’s throat, applying pressure until the soldier ’s eyes shut, and his
head fell forwards as he slipped into unconsciousness.
Kaz rolled the body off him and stood.
The reality of the situation struck Matthias suddenly. Kaz hadn’t picked up
the rifle. Matthias had a gun in his hands, and Kaz Brekker was unarmed.
They were standing over the bodies of two unconscious drüskelle, men who
were supposed to be Matthias’ brothers. I can shoot him, Matthias thought.
Doom Nina and the rest of them with a single act. Again, Matthias had the
strange sense of his life viewed the wrong way up. He was dressed in prison
clothes, an intruder in the place he’d once called home. Who am I now?
He looked at Kaz Brekker, a boy whose only cause was himself. Still, he
was a survivor, and his own kind of soldier. He had honoured his bargain
with Matthias. At any point, he might have decided that Matthias had
served his purpose – once he’d helped them draw up the plans, once they’d
got past the holding cells, once Matthias had revealed the secret bridge.
And whoever he’d become, Matthias was not going to shoot someone
unarmed. He’d not yet sunk so far.
Matthias lowered his weapon.
A faint smile touched Kaz’s lips. “I wasn’t sure what you’d do if it came
down to this.”
“Neither was I,” Matthias admitted. Kaz lifted a brow, and the truth struck
Matthias with the force of a blow. “It was a test. You chose not to pick up
the rifle.”
“I needed to be sure you were really with us. All of us.”
“How did you know I wouldn’t shoot?”
“Because, Matthias, you stink of decency.”
“You’re mad.”
“Do you know the secret to gambling, Helvar?” Kaz brought his good foot
down on the butt of the fallen soldier ’s rifle. The gun flipped up. Kaz had it
in his hands and pointed at Matthias in the space of a breath. He’d never
been in any danger at all. “Cheat. Now let’s clean up and get those uniforms
on. We have a party to go to.”
“One day you’ll run out of tricks, demjin.”
“You’d better hope it’s not today.”
We’ll see what this night brings, Matthias thought as he bent to the task.
Trickery is not my native tongue, but I may learn to speak it yet.
NINE BELLS AND QUARTER CHIME
Jesper knew he should be mad at Kaz – for going after Pekka Rollins and
blowing their first plan to bits, and for pushing them into deeper danger
with this new scheme. But as he and Wylan crept along the drüskelle roof
towards the gatehouse, he was too damn happy to be mad. His heart was
pounding, and adrenaline crackled through his body in delicious spikes. It
was a little like a party he’d once gone to on West Stave. Someone had
filled a city fountain with champagne, and it had taken about two seconds
for Jesper to dive in with boots off and gullet open. Now it was risk filling
up his nose and mouth, making him feel giddy and invincible. He loved it,
and he hated himself for loving it. He should be thinking about the job, the
money, getting out from under his debt, making sure his father didn’t suffer
for his antics. But when Jesper ’s mind even brushed up against those
thoughts, everything in him recoiled. Trying not to die was the best possible
distraction.
Even so, Jesper was more conscious of the sounds they made now that they
were away from the
crowds and chaos of the embassy. This night belonged to the drüskelle.
Hringkälla was their holiday, and they were all safely ensconced on the
White Island. This building was probably the safest place for him and
Wylan to be at the moment. But the silence here seemed weighted, sinister.
There were no willows or fountains here, as there had been at the embassy.
Like the prison, this part of the Ice Court wasn’t intended for public eyes.
Jesper caught himself nervously wiggling the baleen wedged between his
teeth with his tongue and forced himself to stop before he triggered it. He
was fairly sure Wylan would never let him forget a blunder like that.
A large pyramid-shaped skylight looked down on what seemed to be a
training room, its floor emblazoned with the drüskelle wolf’s head, the
shelves lined with weapons. Through the next glass pyramid, he glimpsed a
big dining hall. One wall was taken up by a massive hearth, a wolf’s head
carved into the stone above it. The opposite wall was adorned by an
enormous banner with no discernible pattern, a patchwork of slender strips
of cloth – mostly red and blue, but some purple, too.
It took Jesper a moment to understand what he was seeing.
“Saints,” he said, feeling a little sick. “Grisha colours.”
Wylan squinted. “The banner?”
“Red for Corporalki. Blue for Etherealki. Purple for Materialki. Those are
pieces of the kefta that Grisha wear in battle. They’re trophies.”
“There are so many.”
Hundreds. Thousands. I would have worn purple, Jesper thought, if I’d
joined the Second Army. He reached for the fizzy elation that had been
bubbling through him moments before. He’d been willing, even eager to
risk capture and execution as a thief and hired gun. Why was it worse to
think about being hunted as a Grisha?
“Let’s keep moving.”
Just like the prison and the embassy, the gatehouse in the drüskelle sector
was built around a courtyard so anyone entering could be observed and
fired upon from above. But with the gate out of operation, the courtyard
battlements were as deserted as the rest of the building. Here, slabs of sleek
black stone were inlaid with the silver wolf’s head, the surfaces lit with
eerie blue flame. It was the one part of the Ice Court he’d seen that wasn’t
white or grey. Even the gate was some kind of black metal that looked
impossibly heavy.
A guard was visible below, leaning against the gatehouse arch, a rifle slung
over his shoulder.
“Only one?” asked Wylan.
“Matthias said four guards for non-operational gates.”
“Maybe Yellow Protocol is working in our favour,” said Wylan. “They
could have been sent to the prison sector or—”
“Or maybe there are twelve big Fjerdans keeping warm inside.”
As he and Wylan watched, the guard opened a tin of jurda and shoved a
wad of the dried orange blossoms into his mouth. He looked bored and
irritated, probably frustrated to be stationed far from the fun of the
Hringkälla festivities.
I don’t blame you, Jesper thought. But your life’s about to get a lot more
exciting.
At least the guard was wearing an ordinary uniform instead of drüskelle
black, Jesper considered, still unable to shake the image of that banner from
his mind. His mother was Zemeni, but his father had the Kaelish blood that
had given Jesper his grey eyes, and he’d never quite shaken the
superstitions of the Wandering Isle. When Jesper had started to show his
power, his father had been heartbroken. He’d encouraged Jesper to keep it
hidden. “I’m afraid for you,” he’d said. “The world can be cruel to your
kind.” But Jesper had always wondered if maybe his father had been a little
afraid of him, too.
What if I’d gone to Ravka instead of Kerch? Jesper thought. What if I’d
joined the Second Army?
Did they even let Fabrikators fight, or were they kept walled up in
workshops? Ravka was more stable now, rebuilding. There was no
compulsory draft for Grisha. He could go, visit, maybe learn to use his
power better, leave the gambling dens of Ketterdam behind. If they
succeeded in delivering Bo Yul-Bayur to the Merchant Council, anything
might be possible. He gave himself a shake. What was he thinking? He
needed a dose of imminent peril to get his head straight.
He rose out of his crouch. “I’m going in.”
“What’s the plan?”
“You’ll see.”
“Let me help.”
“You can help by shutting up and staying out of the way. Here,” Jesper said
as he hooked the rope over the side of the roof, letting it drop down behind
a row of stone slabs lining the walkway. “Wait until I’ve immobilised the
guards, then lower yourself down.”
“Jesper—”
Jesper took off across the roof, keeping low as he gave the lip overlooking
the courtyard a wide berth. He positioned himself on the wall behind the
guard.
As noiselessly as he could, he secured another section of rope to the roof
and slowly began to rappel down the wall. The guard was almost directly
beneath him. Jesper was no Wraith, but if he could just make the drop
silently and sneak up behind the guard he could keep things quiet.
He tensed, ready to drop. Another guard strode out of the gatehouse,
clapping his hands in the cold and talking loudly, then a third appeared.
Jesper froze. He was dangling over three armed guards, halfway down a
wall, completely exposed. This was why Kaz did the planning. Sweat broke
out on his brow. He couldn’t take three guards at once. And what if there
were more in the gatehouse, ready to ring the alarm?
“Wait,” said one of the guards. “Did you hear something?”
Don’t look up. Oh, Saints, don’t look up.
The guards moved in a slow circle, rifles raised. One of them craned his
head back, scanning the roof. He began to turn.
A strange, sweet sound pierced the air.
“Skerden Fjerda, kende hjertzeeeeeng, lendten isen en de waaaanden.”
Fjerdan words Jesper didn’t understand crested over the courtyard in a
shimmering, perfect tenor that seemed to catch upon the black stone
battlements.
Wylan.
The guards whirled, rifles pointed at the walkway that led to the courtyard,
seeking the source of the sound.
“Olander?” one called.
“Nilson?” said another.
Their guns were raised, but their voices were more bemused and curious
than aggressive.
What the hell is he doing?
A silhouette appeared in the walkway arch, lurching left and right.
“Skerden Fjerda, kende hjertzeeeeeng,” Wylan sang, doing a surprisingly
convincing impression of a drunk but very talented Fjerdan.
The guards burst out laughing, joining in on the song. “Lendten isen …”
Jesper leaped down. He seized the closest Fjerdan, snapped his neck, and
grabbed his rifle. As the next guard turned, Jesper slammed the butt of the
rifle into his face with a nasty crunch. The third guard raised his weapon,
but Wylan snagged his arms from behind in an awkward hold. The rifle
dropped from the guard’s hands, clattering against the stone. Before he
could cry out, Jesper lunged forwards and rammed the butt of his rifle into
the guard’s gut, then finished him with two strikes to the jaw.
He reached down and tossed one of the rifles to Wylan. They stood over the
guards’ bodies, panting, weapons raised, waiting for more Fjerdan soldiers
to flood out of the gatehouse. No one came. Maybe the fourth guard had
been pulled away for Yellow Protocol.
“Is that how you shut up and stay out of the way?” Jesper whispered as they
dragged the guards’
bodies out of view behind one of the stone slabs.
“Is that how you say thank you?” Wylan retorted.
“What the hell was that song?”
“National anthem,” Wylan said smugly. “Schoolroom Fjerdan, remember?”
Jesper shook his head. “I’m impressed. With you and your tutors.”
They liberated two of the guards’ uniforms, leaving their own prison
clothes in a tidy bundle, then bound the hands and feet of the guards who
still had pulses and gagged them with torn pieces of their prison clothes.
Wylan’s uniform was far too big, and Jesper ’s sleeves and pants looked
ridiculously short, but at least the boots were a reasonable fit.
Wylan gestured to the guards. “Is it safe to leave them, you know—”
“Alive? I’m not big on killing unconscious men.”
“We could wake them up.”
“Pretty ruthless, merchling. Have you ever killed anyone?”
“I’d never even seen a dead body before I came to the Barrel,” Wylan
admitted.
“It’s not something to be embarrassed about,” Jesper said, surprising
himself a little. But he meant it. Wylan needed to learn to take care of
himself, but it would be nice if he could do it without getting on friendly
terms with death. “Make sure the gags are tight.”
They took the extra precaution of securing the bound guards to the base of a
stone slab. The poor nubs would probably be discovered before they
managed to get loose.
“Let’s go,” Jesper said, and they crossed the courtyard to the gatehouse.
There were doors to the right and left of the arch.
They took the right side, climbing the stairs cautiously. Though Jesper
didn’t think anyone would be lying in wait, some guard might be charged
with protecting the gate mechanism at all cost. But the room above the arch
was empty, lit only by a lantern set on a low table where a book lay open
next to a little pile of whole walnuts and cracked shells. The walls were
lined with racks of rifles – very expensive rifles – and Jesper assumed the
boxes on the shelves were filled with ammunition. No dust anywhere. Tidy
Fjerdans.
Most of the room was taken up by a long winch, handles at each end, thick
loops of chain spooled around it. Near each handle, the chains extended in
taut spokes through slots in the stone.
Wylan cocked his head to the side. “Huh.”
“I don’t like that sound. What’s wrong?”
“I was expecting rope or cables, not steel chains. If we’re going to make
sure the Fjerdans can’t get the gate open, we’re going to have to cut through
the metal.”
“But then how do we trigger Black Protocol?”
“That’s the problem.”
The Elderclock began to sound ten bells.
“I’ll weaken the links,” said Jesper. “Look for a file or anything with an
edge.”
Wylan held up the shears from the laundry.
“Good enough,” said Jesper. It would have to be.
We have time, he told himself as he focused on the chain. We can still get
this done. Jesper hoped the others hadn’t met with any surprises.
Maybe Matthias was wrong about the White Island. Maybe the shears
would snap in Wylan’s hands.
Maybe Inej would fail. Or Nina. Or Kaz.
Or me. Maybe I’ll fail.
Six people, but a thousand ways this insane plan could go wrong.
NINE BELLS AND HALF CHIME
Nina dared one more glance over her shoulder, watching the guards drag
Inej away. She’s smart, deadly. Inej can take care of herself.
The thought brought Nina little comfort, but she had to keep moving. She
and Inej had clearly been together, and she wanted to be gone before the
guard who had stopped Inej extended his suspicions to her. Besides, there
was nothing she could do for Inej now, not without giving herself away and
ruining everything. She ducked through the hordes of partygoers and
shucked off the conspicuous horsehair cloak, letting it trail behind her, then
allowing it to drop and be trampled by the crowd. Her costume would still
turn heads, but at least now she didn’t have to worry about a big red topknot
giving away her location.
The glass bridge rose before her in a gleaming arc, shimmering in the blue
flames of the lanterns on its spires. All around her people laughed and clung
to one another as they climbed higher above the ice moat, its surface
shining below, a near-perfect mirror. The effect was disconcerting,
dizzying; her too-tight beaded slippers seemed to float in mid-air. The
people beside her looked as if they were walking on nothing at all.
Again she had the unpleasant understanding that this place must have been
built by Fabrikator craft in some distant past. Fjerdans claimed the
construction of the Ice Court was the work of a god or of Sënj Egmond, one
of the Saints they claimed had Fjerdan blood. But in Ravka, people had
begun to rethink the miracles of the Saints. Had they been true miracles or
simply the work of talented Grisha?
Was this bridge a gift from Djel? An ancient product of slave labour? Or
had the Ice Court been built in a time before Grisha had come to be viewed
as monsters by the Fjerdans?
At the highest point of the arch, she got her first real view of the White
Island and the inner ring.
From a distance, she’d seen the island was protected by another wall. But
from this vantage point she saw the wall had been crafted in the shape of a
leviathan, a giant ice dragon circling the island and swallowing its own tail.
She shivered. Wolves, dragons, what was next? In Ravkan stories, monsters
waited to be woken by the call of heroes. Well, she thought, we’re certainly
not heroes. Let’s hope this one stays asleep.
The descent on the bridge was even more dizzying, and Nina was relieved
when her feet struck solid white marble once more. White cherry trees and
silvery buttonwood hedges lined the marble walkway, and security on this
side of the bridge seemed decidedly more relaxed. The guards who stood at
attention wore elaborate white uniforms accented with silver fur and less
than intimidating silver lace. But Nina remembered what Matthias had said:
As you moved deeper into the rings, security actually tightened – it just
became less visible. She looked at the partygoers moving with her up the
slippery stairs and through the cleft between the dragon’s tail and mouth.
How many were truly guests, noblemen, entertainers? And how many were
Fjerdan soldiers or drüskelle in disguise?
They passed through an open stone court and the palace doors into a vaulted
entry several storeys high. The palace was made of the same clean, white,
unadorned stone as the Ice Court walls, and the whole place felt as if it had
been hollowed out of a glacier. Nina couldn’t tell if it was nerves,
imagination, or if the place really was cold, but her skin puckered with
gooseflesh, and she had to fight to keep her teeth from chattering.
She entered a vast circular ballroom packed with people dancing and
drinking beneath a glistening pack of wolves hewn from ice. There had to
be at least thirty massive sculptures of running, leaping beasts, their flanks
gleaming slickly in the silvery light, jaws open, their slowly melting
muzzles dripping occasionally onto the crowd below. Music from an unseen
orchestra was barely audible over the gabble of conversation.
The Elderclock began to chime ten bells. It had taken her too long to get
across that stupid glass bridge. She needed a better view of the room. As
she headed for a swooping white stone staircase, she caught sight of two
familiar figures in the shadows of a nearby alcove. Kaz and Matthias.
They’d made it. And they were in drüskelle uniforms. Nina suppressed a
shiver. Seeing Matthias in those colours settled a different kind of cold into
her bones. What had he thought when he put it on? She let her eyes meet his
briefly, but his gaze was unreadable. Still, seeing Kaz beside him gave her
some comfort. She wasn’t alone, and they were still on schedule.
She didn’t risk so much as a nod of acknowledgement, but continued up the
stairs to the balcony on the second floor where she could get a better look at
the flow of the crowd. It was a trick she’d learned in school from Zoya
Nazyalensky. There were patterns in the way people moved, the way they
clustered around power. They thought they were drifting, milling aimlessly,
but really they were being drawn towards people of status. Not surprisingly,
there was a large concentration eddying around the Fjerdan queen and her
attendants. Strange, Nina thought, observing their white gowns. In Ravka,
white was a servant’s colour. But that crown wasn’t anything to sniff at –
twisting spines of diamonds that looked like branches glowing with new
frost.
The royals were too well-protected to be of use to her, but not far away she
saw another whirl of activity around a group in military dress. If anyone
knew Yul-Bayur ’s location on the island, it would be someone highly
ranked in Fjerda’s military.
“Nice view, isn’t it?”
Nina nearly jumped as a man sidled up beside her. Some spy she made. She
hadn’t even noticed him approaching.
He grinned at her and placed a hand at the small of her back. “You know,
there are rooms here set aside for a little fun. And you look like more than a
little fun.” His hand slid lower.
Nina plunged his heart rate, and he dropped like a stone, conking his head
on the banister. He’d wake up in about ten minutes with a bad headache and
possibly a minor concussion.
“Is he all right?” asked a passing couple.
“Too much to drink,” said Nina airily.
She slipped quickly down the stairs and into the crowd, moving steadily
towards where a group of soldiers garbed in silver-and-white military dress
surrounded a portly man with a luxuriant moustache. If the constellation of
medals on his chest was any indication, he had to be a general or close to it.
Should she target him directly? She needed someone of high-enough rank
to have access to privileged information – someone drunk enough to make
ill-considered decisions, but not so drunk that he couldn’t take her where
she needed to go. By the ruddy look of the general’s cheeks and the way he
was swaying on his feet, he looked as if he might be too far gone to do
anything but take a nap facedown in a potted plant.
Nina could feel the minutes ticking down. It was time to make her bid. She
nabbed a glass of champagne then moved carefully around the circle. As a
soldier separated from the group, she took a step backwards, directly into
his path. He slammed into her. He was light enough on his feet that it
wasn’t much of a hit, but she gave a sharp cry and lurched forwards,
spilling her champagne.
Instantly, several strong arms reached out to brace her fall.
“You clod,” said the general. “You nearly knocked her from her feet.”
And on the first try, Nina thought to herself. Never mind. I am an excellent
spy.
The poor soldier ’s cheeks were bright red. “Apologies, miss.”
“I’m sorry,” she said in Kerch, feigning confusion and keeping to the
language of the Menagerie.
“I don’t speak Fjerdan.”
“Deep apologies,” he attempted in Kerch. Then made a valiant attempt at
Kaelish, “Much sorry.”
“Oh no, it was my fault entirely,” Nina said breathlessly.
“Ahlgren, stop slaughtering her language and fetch her a fresh glass of
champagne.” The soldier bowed and hurried off. “Are you quite all right?
Shall I find you a seat?” the general asked in excellent Kerch.
“He just startled me,” Nina said with a smile, leaning on the general’s arm.
“I think it might be best to get you off your feet.”
Nina restrained an arch of her brow. I just bet. But first I need to find out
what you know.
“And miss the party?”
“You look pale. Some rest in one of the upper rooms will help.”
Saints, he doesn’t waste any time, does he? Before Nina could insist that she
was perfectly well but might like to take a turn on the terrace, a warm voice
said, “Really, General Eklund, the best way to garner a woman’s goodwill is
not to tell her she looks sickly.”
The general scowled, his moustache bristling, but then he seemed to snap to
attention.
“So true, so true,” he laughed nervously.
Nina turned, and the floor seemed to drop from beneath her feet. No, she
thought, her heart stuttering in panic. It can’t be. He drowned. He’s
supposed to be at the bottom of the ocean.
But if Jarl Brum was dead, he made a very lively corpse.
TEN BELLS AND HALF CHIME
Jesper’s clothes were covered in tiny slivers and shavings of steel. His
stolen uniform was soaked with sweat, his arms ached, and the headache
that had burrowed into his left temple felt as if it was setting up permanent
residence there. For nearly a half hour, he had been focusing on a single
link in the chain that ran from the left end of the winch into one of the slots
in the stone wall, using his power to weaken the metal as Wylan sawed
away at it with the laundry shears. At first they’d been cautious, worried
they’d snap the link and disable the gate before it was time to raise it, but
the steel was stronger than either of them had anticipated, and their progress
was frustratingly slow. When the three-quarters chime rang, Jesper ’s panic
took over.
“Let’s just raise the gate,” he said with a frustrated growl. “We sound Black
Protocol, and then shoot at the winch until it gives up.”
Wylan flipped his curls from his forehead and spared him a quick glance.
Jesper could see the blood on his hands where blisters had formed and then
burst as he hacked away at the link. “You really love guns so much?”
Jesper shrugged. “I don’t love killing people.”
“Then what is it about them?”
Jesper refocused on the link. “I don’t know. The sound. The way the world
narrows to just you and the target. I worked with a gunsmith in Novyi Zem
who knew I was a Fabrikator. We came up with some crazy stuff.”
“For killing people.”
“You build bombs, merchling. Spare me your judgement.”
“My name is Wylan. And you’re right. I don’t have any business criticising
you.”
“Don’t start doing that.”
“What?”
“Agreeing with me,” said Jesper. “Sure path to destruction.”
“I don’t like the idea of killing people, either. I don’t even like chemistry.”
“What do you like?”
“Music. Numbers. Equations. They’re not like words. They … they don’t
get mixed up.”
“If only you could talk to girls in equations.”
There was a long silence, and then, eyes trained on the notch they’d created
in the link, Wylan said,
“Just girls?”
Jesper restrained a grin. “No. Not just girls.” It really was a shame they
were all probably going to die tonight. Then the Elderclock began to toll
eleven bells. His eyes met Wylan’s. They were out of time.
Jesper leaped to his feet, trying to dust some of the metal bits from his face
and shirt. Would the chain hold long enough? Too long? They’d just have to
find out. “Get in position.”
Wylan took his spot at the right handle of the winch, and Jesper grabbed the
handle on the left.
“Prepared to hear the sound of certain doom?” he asked.
“You’ve never heard my father mad.”
“That sense of humour is getting progressively more Barrel-appropriate. If
we survive, I’ll teach you to swear. On my count,” said Jesper. “Let’s let the
Ice Court know the Dregs have come to call.”
He counted down from three and they began to turn the winch, carefully
matching each other ’s pace, eyes on the weakened link. Jesper had
expected some thunderous noise, but except for a few creaks and clanks, the
machinery was silent.
Slowly, the ringwall gate began to rise. Five inches. Ten inches.
Maybe nothing will happen, thought Jesper. Maybe Matthias was lying, or
all this stuff about Black Protocol is a fake to keep people from even trying
to open the gates.
Then the bells of the Elderclock rang out, loud and panicked, high and
demanding, an escalating tide of echoes, climbing one on top of another,
booming over the White Island, the ice moat, the wall.
The bells of Black Protocol had begun to sound. There was no turning back
now. They released the handles of the winch in unison, letting the gate
thunder down, but still the link didn’t give.
“Come on,” Jesper said, coaxing the stubborn metal. A better Fabrikator
probably could have made quick work of it. A Fabrikator on parem
probably could have turned the chain into a set of steak knives and had time
for a cup of coffee. But Jesper was neither of those things, and he’d run out
of finesse. He grabbed hold of the chain, hanging from it, using all his
weight to try to put pressure on the link. Wylan did the same, and for a
moment they hung, pulling on the chain like a couple of crazed squirrels
who hadn’t mastered climbing. Any minute now guards would be storming
into the courtyard, and they’d have to leave off this insanity to defend
themselves. The gate would still be operational. They’d have failed.
“Maybe you should try singing at it,” Jesper said hopelessly.
And then, with a final shiver of protest, the link snapped.
Jesper and Wylan fell to the floor as the chain zipped through their hands,
one end vanishing through the slot, the other sending the winch handles
spinning.
“We did it!” Jesper shouted over the din of the bells, caught somewhere
between excitement and terror. “I’ll cover you. Deal with the winch!”
Jesper picked up his rifle, braced himself at a slit in the stone wall
overlooking the courtyard, and prepared for all hell to break loose.
TEN BELLS AND HALF CHIME
“Just how long are we going to be kept waiting?” a man in wine-coloured
velvet asked. The guards ignored him, but the other guests clustered by the
entry with Inej grumbled their frustration. “I came here at great expense,”
he continued, “and it was not so I could spend all my time hovering by the
front door.”
The guard closest to them recited in a bored monotone, “The men at the
checkpoint are dealing with other guests. As soon as they’re free, you’ll be
taken back through the ringwall and detained at the checkpoint until your
identification can be cleared.”
“Detained,” said the man in velvet. “Like criminals!”
Inej had heard variations on the same exchange for the better part of an
hour. She glanced out at the courtyard that led to the embassy’s ringwall
gate. If she was going to make this plan work, she had to be smart, stay
calm. Except this wasn’t quite the plan, and she definitely didn’t feel calm.
The certainty and optimism she’d felt only a short while ago had all but
evaporated. She waited as the minutes ticked by, eyes scanning the crowd.
But when the three-quarters chime sounded, she knew she could wait no
longer. She had to act now.
“I’ve had enough,” Inej said loudly. “Take us to the checkpoint or let us
go.”
“The guards manning the checkpoint—”
Inej thrust herself to the front of the group and said, “We’re all sick of that
speech. Take us to the gate and get on with it.”
“Be silent,” commanded the guard. “You are guests here.”
Inej jabbed a finger into his chest. “So treat us like guests,” she said,
mustering her best Nina imitation. “I demand to be taken to the gate
immediately, you big blond lump.”
The guard grabbed her arm. “You’re so desperate to go to the gate? Let’s
go. You won’t be coming back through.”
“I only—”
Then another voice echoed across the rotunda. “Stop! You there, I said
stop!”
Inej smelled her perfume – lilies, rich and creamy, a dense golden smell.
She wanted to gag.
Heleen Van Houden, owner and proprietor of the Menagerie, the House of
Exotics, where the world was yours for a price, was pushing her way
through the crowd.
Hadn’t she said Tante Heleen loved to make an entrance?
The guard came to a startled halt as Heleen shoved in front of him.
“Madam, your girl will be returned to you at night’s end. Her papers—”
“She is not my girl,” Heleen said, her eyes slitting viciously. Inej stood
perfectly still, but not even she could vanish with nowhere to go. “That is
the Wraith, right hand of Kaz Brekker and one of the most notorious
criminals in Ketterdam.”
The people around them turned to stare.
“How dare you come here under the auspices of my House?” Heleen hissed.
“The house that clothed you and fed you? And where is Adjala?”
Inej opened her mouth, but panic rose up, tightening her throat, choking the
words before they could come out. Her tongue felt useless and numb. Once
more, she was looking into the eyes of the woman who had beaten her,
threatened her, bought her once, and then sold her again and again.
Heleen grabbed Inej by the shoulders and shook her. “Where is my girl? ”
Inej looked down at the fingers digging into her flesh. For a brief second,
every horror came back to her, and she truly was a wraith, a ghost taking
flight from a body that had given her only pain. No.
A body that had given her strength. A body that had carried her over the
rooftops of Ketterdam, that had served her in battle, that had brought her up
six storeys in the dark of a soot-stained chimney.
Inej seized Heleen’s wrist and twisted it hard to the right. Heleen yelped,
her knees buckling as the guards surged forwards.
“I threw your girl in the ice moat,” Inej snarled, barely recognising her own
voice. Her other hand seized Heleen’s throat, squeezing. “And she’s better
off there than with you.”
Then strong arms were tugging at her, pulling her off the older woman,
hauling her back.
Inej panted, heart racing. I could have killed her, she thought. I felt her
pulse beneath my palm. I should have killed her.
Heleen got to her feet, whimpering and coughing as onlookers moved to
help her. “If she’s here, then Brekker is as well!” she shrieked.
At that moment, as if in agreement, the bells of the Black Protocol began to
sound, loud and insistent. There was a stunned second of inertia. Then the
entire rotunda seemed to explode into action as guards rushed to their posts
and commanders began calling orders.
One of the guards, clearly the captain, said something in Fjerdan. The only
word Inej recognised was prison. He grabbed the silk of her cape and
shouted in Kerch, “Who is on your team? What is your target?”
“I will not speak,” said Inej.
“You’ll sing if we want you to,” spat the guard.
Heleen’s laugh was low and rich with pleasure. “I’ll see you hanged. And
Brekker, too.”
“The bridge is closed,” someone declared. “No one else is getting on or off
the island tonight!”
Angry guests turned to anyone who would listen, demanding explanations.
The guards dragged Inej through the courtyard, past gaping onlookers, and
out of the ringwall gate as the bells continued to toll. They did not bother
with gentleness or diplomacy now.
“I told you you’d wear my silks again, little lynx,” Heleen called from the
courtyard. The gate was already lowering, as the guards sealed it in
accordance with Black Protocol. “You’ll hang in them now.”
The gate slammed closed, but Inej could swear that she still heard Heleen’s
laughter.
TEN BELLS AND HALF CHIME
Nina prayed her panic didn’t show. Did Brum recognise her? He looked
exactly the same: long gold hair touched by grey at the temples, the lean
jaw marked by a tidy beard, the drüskelle uniform –
black and silver, the right sleeve emblazoned with the silver wolf’s head. It
had been more than a year since she’d seen him, but she would never forget
that face or the resolute blue of his eyes.
The last time she’d found herself in Jarl Brum’s company he’d been
strutting for Matthias and his drüskelle brethren in the hold of a ship.
Matthias. Had he seen Brum, his old mentor, alive and talking to Nina? Was
he watching them right now? She resisted the urge to scour the crowd for
some sign of him and Kaz.
Still, the ship’s hold had been dark, and she’d been one of a group of
prisoners – filthy and frightened. Now she was clean, perfumed. Her hair
was a different colour; her skin was powdered.
She was suddenly grateful for her absurd costume. Brum was a man, after
all. Hopefully, Inej was right, and he would just see a redheaded Kaelish
with a very low neckline.
She curtseyed deeply and looked up at him through her lashes. “A
pleasure.”
His gaze roved over her figure. “It just might be. You’re from the House of
Exotics, are you not?
Kep ye nom? ”
“Nomme Fianna,” she replied in Kaelish. Was he testing her? “But you can
call me anything you like.”
“I thought Kaelish girls with the Menagerie wore the red mare cloak.”
She plumped her lips into a sulk. “Our Zemeni stepped on it and tore the
hem. I think she did it on purpose.”
“Cursed girl. Shall we find her and punish her?”
Nina forced a giggle. “How would you set about it?”
“They say the punishment should fit the crime, but I feel it should suit the
criminal. Were you my prisoner, I’d make it my business to learn your likes
and dislikes – and your fears, of course.”
“I am fearless,” she said with a wink.
“Truly? How intriguing. Fjerdans value courage greatly. How are you
finding our country?”
“It’s a magical place,” Nina gushed. If you like ice and more ice. She steeled
herself. If he knew who she was, then she might as well find out now. And
if he didn’t, well, then she still needed to locate Bo Yul-Bayur – and what a
pleasure it would be to trick the legendary Jarl Brum out of the information.
She drew closer. “Do you know where I’d truly like to visit?”
He matched her conspiratorial tone. “I’d love to know all your secrets.”
“Ravka.”
The drüskelle’s lip curled. “Ravka? A land of blasphemers and barbarism.”
“True, but to see a Grisha? Can you imagine the thrill?”
“I assure you. It’s hardly a thrill.”
“You only say that because you wear the sign of the wolf. This means you
are a … drüskelle, yes?”
she asked, pretending to struggle with the Fjerdan word.
“I am their commander.”
Nina widened her eyes. “Then you must have bested many Grisha in
battle.”
“There is little honour in a fight with such a creature. I’d rather face a
thousand honest men with swords than one of those deceitful witches with
unnatural powers.”
And when you arrive with your repeating rifles and your tanks, when you
set upon children and helpless villages, should we not use the weapons we
possess? Nina bit down hard on her inner cheek.
“There are Grisha in Kerch, are there not?” Brum asked.
“So I’ve heard, but I’ve never seen one at the Menagerie or in the Barrel. At
least not that I know of.” Could she risk a mention of jurda parem? How
would the girl she was pretending to be have such knowledge? She leaned
into him, curling her lips into a wicked, slightly guilty smile, and hoping
she looked eager for excitement rather than information. “I know they’re
dreadful, but … they do make me shiver. I’ve heard their powers have no
limits.”
“Well …” the drüskelle hemmed.
Nina could see he was debating something with himself. Best to stage a
strategic retreat. She shrugged. “But perhaps that’s not your area of
expertise.” She glanced over his shoulder and caught the eye of a young
nobleman in pale grey silk.
“Would you like to see a Grisha tonight?”
Her gaze snapped back to Brum. All I need is a mirror. Did Brum have
Grisha prisoners stashed somewhere? What she wanted was to hear all
about Bo Yul-Bayur and jurda parem, but this might be a start. And if she
could get Brum alone …
She swatted his chest. “You’re teasing.”
“Would your mistress notice if you slipped away?”
“That’s why we’re here, no? To slip away?”
He offered his arm. “Then shall we?”
She smiled and looped her hand over his forearm. He patted it gently.
“Good girl.”
She wanted to gag. Maybe I’ll make you impotent, Nina thought grimly, as
he led her out of the ballroom and through a terraced forest of ice sculptures
– a wolf with a screaming double eagle in its jaws, a serpent wrapped
around a bear.
“How … primal,” she murmured.
Brum chuckled and patted her hand again. “We are a culture of warriors.”
Would it be so dreadful to just kill him now? She considered as they strolled.
Make it look like a heart attack? Leave him here in the cold? But she could
endure Jarl Brum leering down the front of her dress for a little while longer
if it meant keeping jurda parem from the world.
Besides, if Bo Yul-Bayur was on this Saintsforsaken island, Brum was the
one to get her to him.
The guards at the ballroom doors had let them past with little more than a
raised brow and a smirk.
Directly ahead of them, Nina saw a vast, silvery tree at the centre of a
circular courtyard, its boughs spreading over the stones in a sparkling
canopy. The sacred ash, Nina realised. Then they must be in the middle of
the island. The courtyard was surrounded on both sides by arched
colonnades. If Matthias’ and Wylan’s drawings had been correct, the
building directly beyond it was the treasury.
Instead of leading her across the courtyard, Brum turned left onto a path
that hugged the side of the colonnade. As he did, Nina glimpsed a group of
people in hooded black coats moving towards the tree.
“Who are they?” asked Nina, though she suspected she knew.
“Drüskelle.”
“Shouldn’t you be with them?”
“This is a ceremony for the young brothers to be welcomed by the old, not
for captains and officers.”
“Did you go through it?”
“Every drüskelle in history has been inducted into the order through the
same ceremony since Djel anointed the first of us.”
Nina forced herself not to roll her eyes. Sure, a giant, gushing spring chose
some guy to hunt innocent people down and murder them. That seems likely.
“That’s what Hringkälla celebrates,” continued Brum. “And every year if
there are worthy initiates, the drüskelle gather at the sacred ash, where they
may once more hear the voice of god.”
Djel says you’re a fanatic, drunk on your own power. Come back next year.
“People forget this is a holy night,” Brum muttered. “They come to the
palace to drink and dance and fornicate.”
Nina had to bite her tongue. Given Brum’s interest in the dip of her
neckline, she doubted his thoughts were particularly holy.
“Are those things so very bad?” she asked teasingly.
Brum smiled and squeezed her arm. “Not in moderation.”
“Moderation isn’t one of my specialities.”
“I can see that,” he said. “I like the look of a woman who enjoys herself.”
I’d enjoy choking you slowly, she thought as she ran her fingers over his
arm. Looking at Brum, she knew she didn’t just blame him for the things
he’d done to her people; it was what he’d done to Matthias as well. He’d
taken a brave, miserable boy and fed him on hate. He’d silenced Matthias’
conscience with prejudice and the promise of a divine calling that was
probably nothing more than the wind moving through the branches of an
ancient tree.
They reached the far side of the colonnade. With a start, she realised Brum
had deliberately led her around the courtyard. Maybe he hadn’t wanted to
bring a whore through a sacred space. Hypocrite.
“Where are we going?” she asked.
“The treasury.”
“Are you going to woo me with jewels?”
“I didn’t think girls like you needed wooing. Isn’t that the point?”
Nina laughed. “Well, every girl likes a little attention.”
“Then that’s what you shall have. And the thrill you were seeking, too.”
Was it possible Yul-Bayur was in the treasury? Kaz had said he’d be in the
most secure place in the Ice Court. That might mean the palace, but it might
just as easily mean the treasury. Why not here? It was another circular
structure wrought in glowing white stone, but the treasury had no windows,
no whimsical decoration or dragon’s scales. It looked like a tomb. Instead
of ordinary guards, two drüskelle stood watch by the heavy door.
Suddenly, the full weight of what she was doing hit her. She was alone with
one of the deadliest men in Fjerda, a man who would gladly torture and
murder her if he knew what she truly was. The plan had been to find
someone to give her information on Bo Yul-Bayur ’s location, not to get
cosy with the highest-ranking drüskelle on the White Island. Her eyes
scanned the surrounding trees and paths, the hedge maze pushed up against
the treasury’s east side, hoping to see some shadow move, to know that
someone was there with her and that she wasn’t completely on her own.
Kaz had sworn he could get her off this island, but Kaz’s first plan had gone
to pieces – maybe this one would, too.
The soldiers didn’t blink as Nina and Brum passed, merely offered a tight
salute. Brum pulled a chain from his neck; a strange circular disk hung from
it. He slid the disk into a nearly invisible indentation in the door and gave it
a turn. Nina eyed the lock warily. This might be beyond even Kaz Brekker
’s skill.
The barrel-vaulted entry was cold and bare, lit by the same harsh light as
the Grisha cells in the prison wing. No gaslight, no candles. Nothing for
Squallers or Inferni to manipulate.
She squinted. “Where are we?”
“The old treasury. The vault was moved years ago. This was converted into
a laboratory.”
Laboratory. The word formed a cold knot beneath Nina’s ribs. “Why?”
“Such an inquisitive little thing.”
I’m nearly as tall as you, she thought.
“The treasury was already secure and well-positioned on the White Island,
so it was a logical choice for such a facility.”
The words were innocuous, but that knot of fear tightened, a cold fist now,
pressing against her chest. She matched Brum’s steps down the vaulted hall,
past smooth white doors, each with a small glass window set into it.
“Here we are,” Brum said, stopping in front of a door that seemed identical
to the others.
Nina peered through the glass. The cell was just like the ones on the top
level of the prison, but the observation panel was on the other side – a large
mirror that took up half of the opposite wall. Inside, she saw a young boy in
a bedraggled blue kefta pacing restlessly, gabbling to himself, scratching at
his arms. His eyes were hollows, his hair lank. He looked just like Nestor
before he’d died. Grisha don’t get sick, she thought. But this was a different
kind of sickness.
“He doesn’t look very menacing.”
Brum moved up behind her. His breath brushed against her ear when he
said, “Oh, believe me, he is.”
Nina’s skin crawled, but she made herself lean into him slightly. “What is
he here for?”
“The future.”
Nina turned and laid her hands on his chest.
“Are there more?”
He blew out an impatient breath and led her to the next door. A girl lay on
her side, her tangled hair covering her face. She was dressed in a dirty shift,
and she had bruises all over her arms. Brum gave a sharp rap on the little
window, startling Nina.
“Look alive,” Brum taunted, but the girl didn’t move. Brum’s finger
hovered over a brass button embedded next to the window. “If you really
want a show, I could press this button.”
“What does it do?”
“Beautiful things. Miraculous, really.”
Nina thought she knew; the button would dose the girl with jurda parem
somehow. For Nina’s entertainment. She tugged Brum away. “It’s all right.”
“I thought you wanted to see a Grisha use her powers.”
“Oh, I do, but she doesn’t look like much fun. Are there more?”
“Close to thirty.”
Nina flinched. The Second Army had been nearly obliterated in Ravka’s
civil war. She couldn’t bear to think that there were thirty Grisha here. “And
are they all in that state?”
He shrugged and steered her down a corridor. “Some are better. Some are
worse. If I find you a lively one, what will be my reward?”
“It would be easier to show you,” she purred.
Nina had had enough of seeing starving, frightened Grisha. She needed YulBayur. Brum must know where he was. The treasury was nearly deserted.
They hadn’t seen a single guard inside. If she could get Brum into an empty
corridor far enough from the entrance that the guards couldn’t hear them …
Could she torture a hardened drüskelle? Could she make him talk? She
thought she just might be able to. She’d seal his nose, put pressure on his
larynx. A few minutes gasping for breath might soften him up.
“Maybe we could find a quiet corner?” Nina suggested.
Brum preened, his chest puffing out. “This way, dirre,” he said using the
Kaelish word for sweetheart.
He led her down a deserted hall, unlocking the door with his circular key.
“This should do,” he said with a bow. “A bit of privacy and a bit of charm.”
Nina winked and sashayed past him. She’d expected some kind of office or
retiring room for the guards. But there was no desk, no cot. The room was
completely bare – except for the drain at the centre of the floor.
She whirled in time to see the cell door slam shut.
“No!” she shouted, hands scrabbling over the surface of the door. It had no
handle.
Brum’s face appeared in the window. His expression was smug, his eyes
cold. “I may have exaggerated the charm, but there is plenty of privacy,
Nina.”
She recoiled.
“That is your name, isn’t it?” he said. “Did you really think I wouldn’t
recognise you? I remember your stubborn little face from the slaving ship,
and we have files on every one of Ravka’s active Grisha. I make it my
business to know them all – even the ones I hope have been swallowed by
the sea.”
Nina lifted her hands.
“Go ahead,” he said. “Burst my eyes in their sockets. Crush my heart in my
chest. That door won’t unlock, and in the time it takes you to tamper with
my pulse, I’ll press this button.” She couldn’t see the brass button, but she
could imagine his finger hovering over it. “Do you know what it does?
You’ve seen the effects of jurda parem. Would you like to feel them, too? It
is effective as a powder, but even more so as a gas.”
Nina froze.
“Smart girl.” His grin lifted the hair on her arms. I will not beg, she told
herself. But she knew she would. Once the drug was in her system, she
wouldn’t be able to stop it. She took a breath of clean air.
A futile gesture, even childish, but she was determined to hold it as long as
she could.
Then Brum paused. “No. This vengeance is not mine to take. There is
someone else who owes you
so much more.” He vanished from the window and a moment later,
Matthias’ face filled the glass. He looked back at her, his eyes hard.
“How?” Nina whispered, not even sure if they could hear her through the
door.
“Did you really believe I’d turn against my nation?” Matthias’ voice was
thick with disgust. “That I’d give up the cause I devoted my life to? I came
to warn Brum as soon as I could.”
“But you said—”
“Country before self, Zenik. It’s something you’ve never understood.”
Nina pressed a hand to her mouth.
“I may never be drüskelle again,” he said. “I may live always with the
charge of ‘slaver ’ around my neck, but I’ll find another way to serve
Fjerda. And I’ll get to see you dosed with jurda parem. I’ll get to see you
mow down your own kind and beg for the next fix. I’ll get to see you betray
the people you love as you asked me to betray my own.”
“Matthias—”
He slammed his fist against the window. “Do not speak my name.” Then he
smiled, a smile as cold and unforgiving as the northern sea. “Welcome to
the Ice Court, Nina Zenik. Now our debt is paid.”
From somewhere outside, the bells of Black Protocol began to ring.
ELEVEN BELLS
“She’s beautiful,” Brum said, “in an exaggerated way. You were strong not
to be lured by her.”
I was lured, though, thought Matthias. And it wasn’t just her beauty.
“The alarm—” Matthias said.
“Her compatriots, no doubt.”
“But—”
“Matthias, my men will take care of it. The Ice Court is secure.” He glanced
back at Nina’s cell.
“We could press the button right now.”
“Won’t she be a threat?”
“We’ve combined the jurda parem with a sedative that makes them more
biddable. We’re still working out the correct ratios, but we’ll get there.
Besides¸ by the second dose, the addiction does the work of controlling
them.”
“Not the first dose?”
“Depends on the Grisha.”
“How many times have you done this?”
Brum laughed. “I haven’t counted. But trust me, she’ll be so desperate for
more jurda parem, she won’t dare act against us. It’s a remarkable
transformation. I think you’ll enjoy it.”
Matthias’ stomach clenched. “You’ve kept the scientist alive then?”
“He’s done his best to replicate the process of creating the drug, but it’s a
complicated thing. Some batches work; others are no better than dust. As
long as he can be of service, he lives.” Brum placed his hand on Matthias’
shoulder, his harsh gaze softening. “I can scarcely believe you’re really
here, alive, standing before me. I thought you were dead.”
“I believed the same of you.”
“When I saw you in that ballroom, I barely recognised you, even in that
uniform. You are so changed—”
“I had to let the witch tailor me.”
Brum’s revulsion was obvious. “You allowed her to—”
Somehow, seeing that response in someone else made Matthias ashamed of
the way he’d reacted to Nina.
“It had to be done,” he said. “I needed her to believe I was committed to her
cause.”
“That’s all over now, Matthias. You are finally safe and among your own
kind.” Brum frowned.
“Something is troubling you.”
Matthias looked into the cell next to Nina’s, then another, and another,
moving down the hall as Brum followed. Some of the captive Grisha were
agitated, pacing. Others had their faces pressed up against the glass. Others
simply lay on the floor. “You can’t have known about parem for more than
a month. How long has this facility been here?”
“I had it built almost fifteen years ago with the blessing of the king and his
council.”
Matthias drew up short. “Fifteen years? Why?”
“We needed somewhere to put the Grisha after the trials.”
“After? When Grisha are found guilty, they’re sentenced to death.”
Brum shrugged. “It is still a death sentence, just one a little longer in the
making. We discovered long ago that the Grisha could prove a useful
resource.”
A resource. “You told me they were to be eradicated. That they were a
blight on the natural world.”
“And they are – when they attempt to masquerade as men. They aren’t
capable of right thinking, of human morality. They are meant to be
controlled.”
“That’s why you wanted parem?” Matthias asked incredulously.
“We have tried our own methods for years with limited success.”
“But you’ve seen what jurda parem can do, what Grisha can do when in its
grip—”
“A gun is not evil. Nor is a blade. Jurda parem ensures obedience. It makes
Grisha what they were always meant to be.”
“A Second Army?” Matthias asked, his voice thick with scorn.
“An army is made of soldiers. These creatures were born to be weapons.
They were born to serve the soldiers of Djel.” Brum squeezed his shoulder.
“Ah, Matthias, how I’ve missed you. Your faith was always so pure. I’m
glad you’re reluctant to embrace this measure, but this is our chance to
strike a deathblow. Do you know why Grisha are so hard to kill? Because
they’re not of this world. But they are very good at killing each other. They
call it ‘like calls to like’. Wait until you see all we’ve achieved, the weapons
their Fabrikators have helped us develop.”
Matthias looked back down the hall. “Nina Zenik spent a year in Kerch
trying to bargain for my freedom. I’m not sure those are the actions of a
monster.”
“Can a viper lie still before it strikes? Can a wild dog lick your hand before
it snaps at your neck?
A Grisha may be capable of kindness, but that does not change her
fundamental nature.”
Matthias considered this. He thought of Nina standing terrified in that cell
as the door slammed shut. He had longed to see her made captive, punished
as he had been punished. And yet, after everything they’d been through, he
was not surprised by the pain he felt at seeing it come to pass.
“What is the Shu scientist like?” he asked Brum.
“Stubborn. Still grieving his father.”
Matthias knew nothing of Yul-Bayur ’s father, but there was a more
important question to ask. “Is he secure?”
“The treasury is the safest place on the island.”
“You keep him here with the Grisha?”
Brum nodded. “The main vault was converted to a laboratory for him.”
“And you’re sure it’s safe?”
“I have the master key,” said Brum, patting the disk hanging from his neck,
“and he’s guarded night and day. Only a select few even know he’s here.
It’s late, and I need to make sure Black Protocol has been addressed, but if
you like, I’ll take you to see him tomorrow.” Brum placed his arm around
Matthias. “And tomorrow we’ll deal with your return and reinstatement.”
“I still stand accused of slave trading.”
“We’ll get the girl to sign a statement recanting the slaving charges easily
enough. Believe me, once she’s had her first taste of jurda parem, she’ll do
anything you ask and more. There will be a hearing, but I swear you will
wear drüskelle colours again, Matthias.”
Drüskelle colours. Matthias had worn them with such pride. And the things
he’d felt for Nina had caused him so much shame. It was still with him,
maybe it always would be. He’d spent too many years full of hate for it to
vanish overnight. But now the shame was an echo, and all he felt was regret
– for the time he’d wasted, for the pain he’d caused, and yes, even now, for
what he was about to do.
He turned to Brum, this man who had become father and mentor to him.
When he’d lost his family, it had been Brum who had recruited him for the
drüskelle. Matthias had been young, angry, completely unskilled. But he’d
given what was left of his broken heart to the cause. A false cause. A lie.
When had he seen it? When he’d helped Nina bury her friend? When he’d
fought beside her? Or had it been long before – when she’d slept in his arms
that first night on the ice? When she’d saved him from the shipwreck?
Nina had wronged him, but she’d done it to protect her people. She’d hurt
him, but she’d attempted everything in her power to make things right.
She’d shown him in a thousand ways that she was honourable and strong
and generous and very human, maybe more vividly human than anyone
he’d
ever known. And if she was, then Grisha weren’t inherently evil. They were
like anyone else – full of the potential to do great good, and also great harm.
To ignore that would make Matthias the monster.
“You taught me so much,” Matthias said. “You taught me to value honour
and strength. You gave
me the tools for vengeance when I needed them most.”
“And with those tools we will build a great future, Matthias. Fjerda’s time
has finally come.”
Matthias returned his mentor ’s embrace.
“I don’t know if you’re wrong about the Grisha,” he said gently. “I just
know you’re wrong about her.”
He held Brum tight, in a hold Matthias had learned in the echoing training
rooms of the drüskelle stronghold, rooms he would never see again. He held
Brum as he struggled briefly and as his body went slack.
When Matthias pulled away, Brum had slipped into unconsciousness, but
Matthias did not think he imagined the rage that lingered on his mentor ’s
features. He made himself memorise it. It was right that he should
remember that look. He was a true traitor at last, and he should carry the
burden of it.
When they’d entered the great ballroom, Matthias and Kaz had staked out a
shadowy nook near the stairs. They’d watched Nina enter in that outrageous
gown of shimmering scales – and then Matthias had spotted Brum. The
shock of seeing his mentor alive had been followed by the terrible
realisation that Brum was following Nina.
“Brum knows,” he’d said to Kaz. “We have to help her.”
“Be smart, Helvar. You can save her and get us Yul-Bayur, too.”
Matthias had nodded and plunged into the crowd. “Decency,” he’d heard
Kaz mutter behind him.
“Like cheap cologne.”
He’d waylaid Brum by the stairs. “Sir—”
“Not now.”
Matthias had been forced to step right in front of him. “Sir.”
Brum had halted then. His face had shown anger at being stopped, then
confusion, and then wondering disbelief. “Matthias?” he’d whispered.
“Please, sir,” Matthias had said hurriedly. “Just give me a moment to
explain. There is a Grisha here tonight intent on assassinating one of your
prisoners. If you’ll bear with me, I can explain the plot and how it can be
stopped.”
Brum had signalled to another drüskelle to watch Nina, and shepherded
Matthias into an alcove beneath the stairs. “Speak,” he’d said, and Matthias
had told him the truth – a bare sliver of it: his escape from the shipwreck,
his near drowning, Nina’s false charge of slavery, his captivity in Hellgate,
and then the promise of the pardon. He’d blamed it all on Nina, and said
nothing of Kaz or the others. When Brum had asked if Nina was alone in
her mission, he’d simply said he didn’t know.
“She believes I’m waiting to escort her over the secret bridge. I broke away
as soon as I could and came to find you.”
A part of him was disgusted by how easily the lies came to his lips, but he
would not leave Nina at Brum’s mercy.
He looked at Brum now, mouth slightly open in sleep. One of the things
he’d respected most in his mentor was his mercilessness, his willingness to
do hard things for the sake of the cause. But Brum had taken pleasure in
what he’d done to these Grisha, what he would have gladly done to Nina
and Jesper. Maybe the hard things had never been difficult for Brum the
way they’d been for Matthias.
They had not been a sacred duty, performed reluctantly for the sake of
Fjerda. They had been a joy.
Matthias slipped the master key from around Brum’s neck and dragged him
into an empty cell, propping him up against the wall in a seated position.
Matthias hated to leave him there, chin flopped on his chest, legs sprawled
in front of him, without dignity. He hated the thought of the shame that
would come to him, a warrior betrayed by someone to whom he’d given his
trust and affection. He knew that pain well.
Matthias pressed his forehead once, briefly, against Brum’s. He knew his
mentor could not hear him, but he spoke the words anyway. “The life you
live, the hate you feel – it’s poison. I can drink it no longer.”
Matthias locked the cell door and hurried down the passage towards Nina,
towards something more.
ELEVEN BELLS
Jesper waited by the slit in the wall, a sniper’s bolt, the perfect place for a
boy like him. What did we just do? he wondered. But his blood was alive,
his rifle was at his shoulder, the world made sense again.
So where were the guards? Jesper had expected them to rush into the
courtyard as soon as he and Wylan triggered Black Protocol.
“I’ve got it!” Wylan called from behind him.
Jesper hated to give up the high ground before they knew what they were
up against, but they were short on time, and they needed to get to the roof.
“All right, let’s go.”
They raced down the stairs. As they were about to burst from the gatehouse
archway, six guards came running into the courtyard. Jesper stopped short
and held out his arm.
“Turn back,” he said to Wylan.
But Wylan was pointing across the courtyard. “Look.”
The guards weren’t moving towards the gatehouse; all their attention was
focused on a man in olive drab clothing standing by one of the stone slabs.
That uniform …
A woman walked through the wall, a figure of shimmering mist that
solidified beside the stranger.
She wore the same olive drab.
“Tidemakers,” Wylan said.
“The Shu.”
The guards opened fire, and the Tidemakers vanished, then reappeared
behind the soldiers and lifted their arms.
The guards screamed and dropped their weapons. A red haze formed
around them. The haze grew
denser as the guards shrieked, their flesh seeming to shrink against their
bones.
“It’s their blood,” Jesper said, bile rising in his throat. “All Saints, the
Tidemakers are draining their blood.” They were being squeezed dry.
The blood formed floating pools in the vague shapes of men, slick shadows
that hovered in the air, the wet red of garnets, then splashed to the ground at
the same time as the guards collapsed, flaccid skin hanging from their
desiccated bodies in grotesque folds.
“Back up the stairs,” whispered Jesper. “We need to get out of here.”
But it was too late. The female Tidemaker disappeared. In the next breath,
she was on the stairs. She balanced her weight on the banisters with her
hands and planted her boots against Wylan’s chest, kicking him backwards
into Jesper. They tumbled onto the black stone of the courtyard.
The rifle was jerked from Jesper ’s arms and tossed aside with a clatter. He
tried to stand, and the Tidemaker cuffed him on the back of his head. Then
he was lying next to Wylan as the Tidemakers towered above them. They
lifted their hands, and Jesper saw the faintest red haze appear over him. He
was going to be drained. He felt his strength start to ebb. He looked to the
left but the rifle was too far away.
“Jesper,” Wylan gasped. “Metal. Fabrikate.” And then he started to scream.
In a flash, Jesper understood. This was a fight he couldn’t win with a gun.
There was no time to think, no time to doubt.
He ignored the pain tearing over his skin and focused all his attention on the
bits of metal clinging to his clothes, the shavings and tiny particles from the
severed link in the gate chain. He wasn’t a good Fabrikator, but they didn’t
expect him to be a Fabrikator at all. He thrust his hands forwards, and the
bits of metal flew from his uniform, a gleaming cloud that hung in the air
for the briefest second then shot towards the Tidemakers.
The female Tidemaker screamed as the metal burrowed into her flesh, and
she tried to turn to mist.
The other Tidemaker did the same, features liquefying, but then solidifying
once more, his face grey, speckled with bits of metal. Jesper didn’t relent.
He drove the metal home, into their organs, questing deeper. He could feel
them attempting to manipulate the particles of metal. If the problem had
been a bullet or a blade, they might have succeeded, but the flecks and
shavings of steel were too many and too small. The woman clutched her
stomach and fell to her knees. The man screamed, coughing up clotted
black specks of metal and blood.
“Help me,” the woman sobbed. Her edges blurred, her body vibrating as she
struggled to fade to mist.
Jesper dropped his hands. He and Wylan scooted away from the writhing
bodies of the Tidemakers.
Were they dying? Had he just killed two of his kind? Jesper had only
wanted to survive. He thought again of the banner on the wall, all those
strips of red, blue, and purple.
Wylan tugged at his arm. His face looked slightly transparent, the veins too
close to the surface.
“Jesper, we have to go.”
Jesper nodded slowly.
“Now.”
Jesper made his feet move, made himself follow Wylan, scale the rope to
the roof. He felt woozy and lightheaded. The others were depending on
him, he knew that. He had to keep going. But he felt as if he’d left some
part of himself in the courtyard below, something he hadn’t even known
mattered, intangible as mist.
ELEVEN BELLS AND QUARTER CHIME
When Matthias opened the door to Nina’s cell, she hesitated for the briefest
moment. She couldn’t help it. As long as she lived, she would never forget
Matthias’ face at that window, how cruel he’d seemed, or the doubt that had
sprung up in her heart. She felt it again, looking at him standing in the
doorway, but when he held his hand out to her, she knew they were done
with fear.
She ran to him, and he swept her up in his arms.
He buried his face in her hair. She felt his lips move against her ear when he
said, “I never want to see you like this again.”
“Do you mean the dress or the cell?”
A laugh shook him. “Definitely the cell.” Then he cupped her face in his
hands. “Jer molle pe oonet. Enel mörd je nej afva trohem verretn.”
Nina swallowed hard. She remembered those words and what they truly
meant. I have been made to protect you. Only in death will I be kept from
this oath. It was the vow of the drüskelle to Fjerda. And now it was
Matthias’ promise to her.
She knew she should say something profound, something beautiful in
response. Instead, she spoke the truth. “If we make it out of here alive, I’m
going to kiss you unconscious.”
A grin split his beautiful face. She couldn’t wait to see the real blue of his
eyes again.
“Yul-Bayur is in the vault,” he said. “Let’s go.”
As Nina raced down the hall after Matthias, the clanging bells of Black
Protocol filled her ears. If Brum had known about her, then chances were
the other drüskelle did, too. She doubted it would be long before they came
looking for their commander.
“Please tell me Kaz hasn’t gone missing again,” she said as they hurtled
down the corridor.
“I left him in the ballroom. We’re to meet him by the ash.”
“Last time I looked, it was surrounded by drüskelle.”
“Maybe Black Protocol will take care of that.”
“If we survive the drüskelle, we won’t survive Kaz, not if we kill Yul-Bayur
—”
Matthias put up a hand for them to stop before they turned the next corner.
They approached slowly. When they rounded it, Nina made quick work of
the guard at the vault door. Matthias took his rifle, then Brum’s key was in
the lock, and the circular entry to the vault was opening.
Nina raised her hands, prepared to attack. They waited, hearts pounding, as
the door slid open.
The room was as white as all the others, but hardly bare. Its long tables
were full of beakers set over low blue flames, heating and cooling
apparatuses, glass vials full of powders in varying shades of orange. One
wall was devoted to a massive slate board covered in chalk equations. The
other was all glass cases with little metal doors. They contained blooming
jurda plants, and Nina guessed the cases must be heated. A cot was pushed
up against the other wall, its thin covers rumpled, papers and notebooks
strewn around it. A Shu boy was seated cross-legged on it. He stared at
them, his dark hair flopping over his forehead, a notebook in his lap. He
couldn’t have been more than fifteen.
“We aren’t here to harm you,” Nina said in Shu. “Where is Bo Yul-Bayur?”
The boy brushed his hair back from his golden eyes. “He’s dead.”
Nina frowned. Had Van Eck’s information been wrong? “Then what is all
this?”
“Have you come to kill me?”
Nina wasn’t quite sure of the answer to that. “Sesh-uyeh?” she ventured.
The boy’s face crumpled in relief. “You’re Kerch.”
Nina nodded. “We came to rescue Bo Yul-Bayur.”
The boy pulled his knees to his chest and wrapped his arms around them.
“He’s beyond your rescue. My father died when the Fjerdans tried to stop
the Kerch from taking us out of Ahmrat Jen.”
His voice faltered. “He was killed in the crossfire.”
My father. Nina translated for Matthias as she tried to take in what this
meant.
“Dead?” Matthias asked, and his broad shoulders slumped slightly. Nina
knew what he was thinking
– all they’d endured, all they’d done, and Yul-Bayur had been dead the
whole time.
But the Fjerdans had kept his son alive for a reason. “They’re trying to
make you recreate his formula,” she said.
“I helped him in the lab, but I don’t remember everything.” He bit his lip.
“And I’ve been stalling.”
Whatever parem the Fjerdans had been using on the Grisha must have come
from the original stock Bo Yul-Bayur had been bringing to the Kerch.
“Can you do it?” Nina asked. “Can you recreate the formula?”
The boy hesitated. “I think so.”
Nina and Matthias exchanged a glance.
Nina swallowed. She’d killed before. She’d killed tonight, even, but this
was different. This boy wasn’t pointing a gun at her or trying to harm her.
Murdering him – and it would be murder – would also mean betraying Inej,
Kaz, Jesper, and Wylan. People who were risking their lives even now for a
prize they’d never see. But then she thought of Nestor falling lifeless in the
snow, of the cells full of Grisha lost in their own misery, all because of this
drug.
She raised her arms. “I’m sorry,” she said. “If you succeed, there will be no
end to the suffering you unleash.”
The boy’s gaze was steady, his chin jutting up stubbornly, as if he’d known
this moment might come. The right thing to do was obvious. Kill this boy
quickly, painlessly. Destroy the lab and everything in it. Eradicate the secret
of jurda parem. If you wanted to kill a vine, you didn’t just keep cutting it
back. You tore it from the ground by the roots. And yet her hands were
shaking. Wasn’t this the way drüskelle thought? Destroy the threat, wipe it
out, no matter that the person in front of you was innocent.
“Nina,” Matthias said softly, “he’s just a kid. He’s one of us.”
One of us. A boy not much younger than she was, caught up in a war he
hadn’t chosen for himself.
A survivor.
“What’s your name?” she asked.
“Kuwei.”
“Kuwei Yul-Bo,” she began. Did she intend to pass sentence? To apologise?
To beg forgiveness?
She’d never know. When she found her voice, all she said was, “How fast
can you destroy this lab?”
“Fast,” he replied. He sliced a hand through the air, and the flames from
beneath one of the beakers shot out in a blue arc.
Nina stared. “You’re Grisha. You’re an Inferni.”
Kuwei nodded. “Jurda parem was a mistake. My father was trying to find a
way to help me hide my powers. He was a Fabrikator. A Grisha, as I am.”
Nina’s mind was reeling – Bo Yul-Bayur, a Grisha hiding in plain sight
behind the borders of the Shu Han. There was no time to let it sink in.
“We need to destroy as much of your work as we can,” she said.
“There are combustibles,” replied Kuwei, already gathering up papers and
jurda samples. “I can rig an explosion.”
“Only the vault. There are Grisha here.” And guards. And Matthias’ mentor.
Nina would have gladly let Brum die, but though Matthias had betrayed his
commander, she doubted he’d want to see the man who’d become a second
father to him blown to bits. Her heart rebelled when she thought of the
Grisha she’d be leaving behind, but there was no way to get them to the
harbour.
“Leave the rest,” she said to Matthias and Kuwei. “We need to move.”
Kuwei arranged a series of vials full of liquid over the burners. “I’m ready.”
They checked the corridor and hurried towards the treasury entrance. At
every turn she expected to see drüskelle or guards storming their way, but
they charged through the halls unimpeded. At the main door, they paused.
“There’s a hedge maze to our left,” Nina said.
Matthias nodded. “We’ll use it for cover then make a run for the ash.”
As soon as they opened the door, the clamour of the bells became almost
unbearable. Nina could see the Elderclock on the highest silvery spire of the
palace, its face glowing like a moon. Bright lights from the guard towers
moved across the White Island, and Nina could hear the shouts of soldiers
closing in around the palace.
She clung to the side of the building, following Matthias, trying to keep to
the shadows.
“Hurry,” Kuwei said with a nervous glance back at the lab.
“This way,” Matthias said. “The maze—”
“Halt!” someone shouted.
Too late. Guards were racing towards them from the direction of the maze.
There was nothing to do but run. They bolted past the entrance to the
colonnade and into the circular courtyard. There were drüskelle everywhere
– in front of them, behind them. Any moment they’d be gunned down.
That was when the explosion hit. Nina felt it before she heard it: A wave of
heat lifted her off her feet and tossed her in the air, chased by a deafening
boom. She came down hard on the white paving stones.
Everything was smoke and chaos. Nina struggled to her knees, ears ringing.
One side of the treasury had been reduced to rubble, smoke and dust
billowing into the night sky.
Matthias was already striding towards her with Kuwei. She pushed to her
feet.
“Sten! ” cried two guards breaking off from another group running in the
direction of the treasury.
“What’s your business here?”
“We were just enjoying the party!” Nina exclaimed, letting all of her real
exhaustion and terror fill her voice. “And then … then …” It was
embarrassingly easy to let the tears flow.
He held up his gun. “Show me your papers.”
“No papers, Lars.”
The witchhunter ’s head snapped up as Matthias stepped forwards. “Do I
know you?”
“You did once, though I looked a bit different. Hje marden, Lars?”
“Helvar?” he asked. “They … they said you were dead.”
“I was.”
Lars looked from Matthias to Nina. “This is the Heartrender Brum brought
to the treasury.” Then he took in Kuwei’s presence, and understanding
struck. “Traitor,” he snarled at Matthias.
Nina raised her hand to drop Lars’ pulse, but as she did, she caught
movement in the shadows to her right. She cried out as something struck
her. When she looked down, she saw loops of cable closing over her,
binding her upper arms tight to her body. She couldn’t raise her hands. She
couldn’t use her power. Matthias grunted, and Kuwei screamed as cables
lashed from the darkness, snapping around their torsos, binding their arms.
“This is what we do, bloodletter,” sneered Lars. “We hunt filth like you. We
know all of your tricks.” He kicked Matthias’ legs from beneath him.
Matthias went to his knees and sucked in a breath.
“They told us you were dead. We mourned you, burned boughs of ash for
you. But now I see they were protecting us from something worse. Matthias
Helvar, a traitor, aiding our enemies, consorting with unnaturals.” He spat
in Matthias’ face. “How could you betray your country and your god?”
“Djel is the god of life, not death.”
“Are there others here for Yul-Bayur besides you and this creature?”
“No,” lied Nina.
“I didn’t ask you, witch,” said Lars. “It doesn’t matter. We’ll get the
information from you our own way.” He turned to Kuwei. “And you. Don’t
think there won’t be repercussions.”
He made a signal in the air. From the shadows of the colonnade a row of
men and boys emerged:
drüskelle, hoods drawn up over long golden hair that glinted at their collars,
dressed in black and silver, like creatures born from the dark crevasses that
split the northern ice. They fanned out, surrounding Nina, Matthias, and
Kuwei.
Nina thought of the white prison cells, the drains in the floors. Had all of
the parem been destroyed with Kuwei’s lab? How long would it take him to
make another batch, and what would they subject her to before that? She
cast a last desperate look into the darkness, praying for some sign of Kaz.
Had someone got to him, too? Had he just abandoned them there? She was
meant to be a warrior. She needed to steel herself against what was to come.
One of the drüskelle came forward with what looked like a long-handled
whip attached to the cables that bound them, and handed it to Lars.
“Do you recognise this, Helvar?” Lars asked. “You should. You helped with
its design. Retractable cables for controlling multiple captives. And the
barbs, of course.”
Lars flicked his finger over one of the cables, and Nina gasped as stinging
little barbs jabbed into her arms and torso. The drüskelle laughed.
“Leave her be,” Matthias growled in Fjerdan, the words bristling with rage.
For the briefest second, she saw a flash of panic in his former compatriots.
He was bigger than all of them, and he’d been one of their leaders, one of
the best of these murderous boys. Then Lars gave another cable a hard flick.
The barbs released, and Matthias let out a pained huff of breath, doubling at
the waist, human once more.
The snickering that followed was furtive and cruel.
Lars gave the whip a sharp snap, and the cables contracted, forcing Nina,
Matthias, and Kuwei to totter after him in an awkward parade.
“Do you still pray to our god, Helvar?” Lars asked as they passed the sacred
tree. “Do you think Djel hears the mewling of men who give themselves
over to the defilement of Grisha? Do you think
—”
Then a sharp, animal yelp sounded. It took Nina and the others a long
moment to realise it had come from Lars. He opened his mouth and blood
gushed over his chin and onto the bright silver buttons of his uniform. His
hand released the whip, and the hooded drüskelle beside him lunged
forwards to snatch it up.
A sharp pop pop pop came from the base of the sacred tree. Nina
recognised that sound – she’d heard it on the northern road before they
waylaid the prison wagon. When they’d brought the tree down. The ash
creaked and moaned. Its ancient roots began to curl.
“Nej! ” cried one of the drüskelle. They stood open-mouthed, gaping at the
stricken tree. “Nej! ”
another voice wailed.
The ash began to tilt. It was too large to be felled by salt concentrate alone,
but as it tipped, a dull roar emerged from the gaping black hole beneath it.
This was where the drüskelle came to hear the voice of their god. And now
he was speaking.
“This is going to sting a bit,” said the drüskelle holding the whip. His voice
was rasping, familiar.
His hands were gloved. “But if we live, you’ll thank me later.” His hood
slid off, and Kaz Brekker looked back at them. The stunned drüskelle lifted
their rifles.
“Don’t pop the baleen before you hit bottom,” Kaz called. Then he grabbed
Kuwei and launched them both into the black mouth beneath the roots of
the tree.
Nina screamed as her body was yanked forwards by the cables. She
scrabbled over the stones trying to find purchase. The last thing she
glimpsed was Matthias toppling into the hole beside her.
She heard gunfire – and then she was falling into the black, into the cold,
into the throat of Djel, into nothing at all.
ELEVEN BELLS AND THREE-QUARTERS CHIME
Kaz had considered trying to eavesdrop on Matthias and Brum in the
ballroom, but he didn’t want to lose sight of Nina when there were so many
drüskelle around. He’d gambled on Matthias’ feelings for Nina, but he’d
always liked those odds. The real risk had been in whether or not someone
as honest as Matthias could convincingly lie to his mentor ’s face.
Apparently the Fjerdan had hidden skills.
Kaz had tracked Nina and Brum across the grounds to the treasury. Then
he’d taken cover behind an ice sculpture and focused on the miserable task
of regurgitating the packets of Wylan’s root bombs he’d swallowed before
they’d ambushed the prison wagon. He’d had to bring them up – along with
a pouch of chloropellets and an extra set of lockpicks he’d forced down his
gullet in case of emergency
– every other hour to keep from digesting them. It hadn’t been pleasant.
He’d learned the trick from an East Stave magician with a firebreathing act
that had run for years before the man had accidentally poisoned himself by
ingesting kerosene.
Once Kaz was done, he’d let himself check the treasury perimeter, the roof,
the entry, but eventually there was nothing for him to do but keep hidden,
stay alert, and worry about all the things that might be going wrong. He
remembered Inej standing on the embassy roof, aglow with some new
fervour he didn’t understand but could still recognise – purpose. It had
suffused her with light. I’m taking my share, and I’m leaving the Dregs.
When she’d talked about leaving Ketterdam before, he’d never quite
believed her. This time was different.
He’d been hidden in the shadows of the western colonnade when the bells
of Black Protocol had
begun to ring, the chimes of the Elderclock booming over the island,
shaking the air. Lights from the guard towers came on in a bright flood. The
drüskelle around the ash left off their rituals and began shouting orders, and
a wave of guards descended from the towers to spread out over the island.
He’d waited, counting the minutes, but there was still no sign of Nina or
Matthias. They’re in trouble, Kaz had thought. Or you were dead wrong
about Matthias, and you’re about to pay for all of those talking tree jokes.
He had to get inside the treasury, but he’d need some kind of cover while he
picked that inscrutable lock, and there were drüskelle everywhere. Then he
saw Nina and Matthias and a person he assumed must be Bo Yul-Bayur
running from the treasury. He’d been about to call out to them when the
explosion hit, and everything went to hell.
They blew up the lab, he’d thought as debris rained down around him. I
definitely did not tell them to blow up the lab.
The rest was pure improvisation, and it left little time for explanation. All
Kaz had told Matthias was to meet him by the ash when Black Protocol
began to ring. He’d thought he’d have time to tell them to deploy the baleen
before they were all falling through the dark. Now he just had to hope that
they wouldn’t panic and that his luck was waiting somewhere below.
The fall seemed impossibly long. Kaz hoped the Shu boy he was holding on
to was a surprisingly young Bo Yul-Bayur and not some hapless prisoner
Nina and Matthias had decided to liberate. He’d shoved the disk into the
boy’s mouth as they went over, snapping it with his own fingers. He gave
the whip a flick, releasing all of the cables, and heard the others scream as
the strands retracted. At least they wouldn’t go into the water bound. Kaz
waited as long as he dared to bite into his own baleen.
When he struck the icy water, he feared his heart might stop.
He wasn’t sure what he’d expected, but the force of the river was terrifying,
flowing fast and hard as an avalanche. The noise was deafening even
beneath the water, but with fear also came a kind of giddy vindication. He’d
been right.
The voice of god. There was always truth in legend. Kaz had spent enough
time building his own myth to know. He’d wondered where the water that
fed the Ice Court’s moat and fountains came from, why the river gorge was
so very deep and wide. As soon as Nina had described the drüskelle
initiation ritual, he’d known: The Fjerdan stronghold hadn’t been built
around a great tree but around a spring.
Djel, the wellspring, who fed the seas and rains, and the roots of the sacred
ash.
Water had a voice. It was something every canal rat knew, anyone who had
slept beneath a bridge or weathered a winter storm in an overturned boat –
water could speak with the voice of a lover, a long-lost brother, even a god.
That was the key, and once Kaz recognised it, it was as if someone had laid
a perfect blueprint over the Ice Court and its workings. If Kaz was right,
Djel would spit them out into the gorge. Assuming they didn’t drown first.
And that was a very real possibility. The baleen only provided enough air
for ten minutes, maybe twelve if they could keep calm, which he doubted
they would. His own heart was hammering, and his lungs already felt tight.
His body was numb and aching from the temperature of the water, and the
darkness was impenetrable. There was nothing but the dull thunder of the
water and a sickening sense of tumbling.
He hadn’t been sure of the speed of the water, but he knew damn well the
numbers were close.
Numbers had always been his allies – odds, margins, the art of the wager.
But now he had to rely on something more. What god do you serve? Inej
had asked him. Whichever will grant me good fortune.
Fortunate people didn’t end up racing ass over teakettle beneath an ice moat
in hostile territory.
What would be waiting when they fished up in the gorge? Who would be
waiting? Jesper and Wylan had managed to engage Black Protocol. But had
they managed to do the rest? Would he see Inej on the other side?
Survive. Survive. Survive. It was the way he’d lived his life, moment to
moment, breath to breath, since that terrible morning when he’d woken to
find that Jordie was still dead and he was still very much alive.
Kaz tumbled through the dark. He was colder than he’d ever been. He
thought of Inej’s hand on his cheek. His mind had gone jagged at the
sensation, a riot of confusion. It had been terror and disgust and – in all of
that clamour – desire, a wish that lingered still, the hope that she would
touch him again.
When he was fourteen, Kaz had put together a crew to rob the bank that had
helped Hertzoon prey on him and Jordie. His crew got away with fifty
thousand kruge, but he’d broken his leg dropping down from the rooftop.
The bone didn’t set right, and he’d limped ever after. So he’d found himself
a Fabrikator and had his cane made. It became a declaration. There was no
part of him that was not broken, that had not healed wrong, and there was
no part of him that was not stronger for having been broken. The cane
became a part of the myth he built. No one knew who he was. No one knew
where he came from. He’d become Kaz Brekker, cripple and confidence
man, bastard of the Barrel.
The gloves were his one concession to weakness. Since that night among
the bodies and the swim from the Reaper ’s Barge, he had not been able to
bear the feeling of skin against skin. It was excruciating to him, revolting. It
was the only piece of his past that he could not forge into something
dangerous.
The baleen began to bead around his lips. Water was seeping in. How far
had the river taken them?
How far did they have left to go? He still had one hand gripped around Bo
Yul-Bayur ’s collar. The Shu boy was smaller than Kaz; hopefully he had
enough air.
Bright flashes of memory sparked through Kaz’s mind. A cup of hot
chocolate in his mittened hands, Jordie warning him to let it cool before he
took a sip. Ink drying on the page as he’d signed the deed to the Crow Club.
The first time he’d seen Inej at the Menagerie, in purple silk, her eyes lined
with kohl. The bone-handled knife he’d given her. The sobs that had come
from behind the door of her room at the Slat the night she’d made her first
kill. The sobs he’d ignored. Kaz remembered her perched on the sill of his
attic window, sometime during that first year after he’d brought her into the
Dregs. She’d been feeding the crows that congregated on the roof.
“You shouldn’t make friends with crows,” he’d told her.
“Why not?” she asked.
He’d looked up from his desk to answer, but whatever he’d been about to
say had vanished on his tongue.
The sun was out for once, and Inej had turned her face to it. Her eyes were
shut, her oil-black lashes fanned over her cheeks. The harbour wind had
lifted her dark hair, and for a moment Kaz was a boy again, sure that there
was magic in this world.
“Why not?” she’d repeated, eyes still closed.
He said the first thing that popped into his head. “They don’t have any
manners.”
“Neither do you, Kaz.” She’d laughed, and if he could have bottled the
sound and got drunk on it every night, he would have. It terrified him.
Kaz took a last breath as the baleen dissolved and water flooded in. He
squinted against the rush of the water, hoping to see some hint of daylight.
The river knocked him against the wall of the tunnel.
The pressure in his chest grew. I’m stronger than this, he told himself. My
will is greater. But he could hear Jordie laughing. No, little brother. No one
is stronger. You’ve cheated death too many times.
Greed may do your bidding, but death serves no man.
Kaz had almost drowned that night in the harbour, kicking hard in the dark,
borne aloft by Jordie’s corpse. There was no one and nothing to carry him
now. He tried to think of his brother, of revenge, of Pekka Rollins tied to a
chair in the house on Zelverstraat, trade orders stuffed down his throat as
Kaz forced him to remember Jordie’s name. But all he could think of was
Inej. She had to live. She had to have made it out of the Ice Court. And if
she hadn’t, then he had to live to rescue her.
The ache in his lungs was unbearable. He needed to tell her … what? That
she was lovely and brave and better than anything he deserved. That he was
twisted, crooked, wrong, but not so broken that he couldn’t pull himself
together into some semblance of a man for her. That without meaning to,
he’d begun to lean on her, to look for her, to need her near. He needed to
thank her for his new hat.
The water pressed at his chest, demanding that he part his lips. I won’t, he
swore. But in the end, Kaz opened his mouth, and the water rushed in.
PART 6
PROPER THIEVES
Inej’s heart careened against her ribs. On the aerial swings, there was a
moment when you let go of one and reached for the next, when you realised
you’d made a mistake and you no longer felt weightless, when you simply
started to fall.
The guards hauled her back through the prison gate. There were many more
guards and many more guns pointed at her than the first time she’d come
through this courtyard, when she’d stepped off the prison wagon with the
rest of the crew. They passed through the mouth of the wolf and up the
stairs, and dragged her down the walkway through the corridor with its
giant glass enclosure. Nina had translated the banner for her: Fjerdan might.
She’d smirked at that the first time she’d passed, gazing down at the tanks
and weapons, one eye on Kaz and the others on the opposite walkway.
She’d wondered what kind of men needed to display their strength to
helpless captives in chains.
The guards were moving too fast. For the second time that night, Inej made
herself stumble.
“Move,” the soldier snapped in Kerch, dragging her forwards.
“You’re going too quickly.”
He gave her arm a hard shake. “Stop stalling.”
“Don’t you want to meet our inquisitors?” the other asked her. “They’ll get
you talking.”
“But you won’t look so pretty after they’re through.”
They laughed, and Inej’s stomach turned. She knew they’d spoken in Kerch
to make sure she understood.
She thought she might be able to take them, despite their guns and even
without her knives. Her hands weren’t bound, and they still thought they
had a disgraced prostitute on their hands. Heleen had called her a criminal,
but to them, she was only a little thief in scraps of purple silk.
Just as she was considering making her move, she heard other footsteps
headed their way. She saw the silhouettes of two more men in uniform
striding towards them. Could she manage four guards on her own? She
wasn’t sure, but she knew that if they left this corridor behind, it was all
over.
She glanced again at the banner in the glass enclosure. It was now or never.
She hooked her leg around the ankle of the guard to her left. He pitched
forwards, and she slammed her hand upwards, breaking his nose.
The other raised his gun. “You’re going to pay for that.”
“You won’t shoot me. You need information.”
“I can shoot you in the leg,” he sneered, lowering his rifle.
Then he crumpled to the ground, a pair of beaten-up shears protruding from
his back. The soldier standing behind him gave a cheery wave.
“Jesper,” she gasped in relief. “Finally.”
“I’m here, too, you know,” said Wylan.
The guard with the broken nose moaned from the floor and tried to lift his
gun. Inej gave him a good hard kick to the head. He didn’t move again.
“Did you manage to get hold of a big enough diamond?” Jesper asked.
Inej nodded and slipped the massive jewelled choker from her sleeve.
“Hurry,” she said. “If Heleen hasn’t noticed it’s missing, she will soon.”
Though with Black Protocol in effect there wasn’t much she could do about
it.
Jesper snatched the choker from Inej’s hand, mouth agape. “Kaz said we
needed a diamond. He didn’t tell you to steal Heleen Van Houden’s
diamonds!”
“Just get to work.”
Kaz had given Inej two objectives: nab a big enough diamond for Jesper to
work with and get herself into this corridor after eleven bells. There were
plenty of other diamonds she could have stolen for their purposes and other
trouble she could have made to attract the guards’ attention. But it was
Heleen she’d wanted to dupe. For all the secrets she’d gathered and
documents she’d stolen and violence she’d done, it was Heleen Van Houden
she’d needed to best.
And Heleen had made it easy. During the scuffle in the rotunda, Inej had
made sure that she was too focused on being choked to worry about being
robbed. After that, all of Heleen’s attention had been devoted to gloating.
Inej only regretted that she wouldn’t be there to see Tante Heleen discover
her prized necklace was missing.
Jesper lit a lantern and went to work beside Wylan. Only then did she see
they were both covered in soot from their trip back down the prison
incinerator shaft. They’d dragged two grubby coils of rope with them, too.
While they worked, Inej barred the doors set into the arches on either side
of the corridor. They had just a few minutes before another patrol came
through and discovered a door that shouldn’t be locked.
Wylan had produced a long metal screw and what looked like the handle of
a massive winch, and
was attempting to rig them together to form what Inej hoped would be an
ugly but functional drill.
A thump came from one of the doors.
“Hurry,” Inej said.
“Saying that doesn’t actually make me work faster,” Jesper complained as
he concentrated on the stones. “If I just break them down, they’ll lose their
molecular structure. They have to be cut, carefully, the edges assembled
into a single perfect drill bit. I don’t have the training—”
“Whose fault is that?” put in Wylan, not looking up from his own work.
“Again, not helpful.”
Now the guards were pounding on the door. Across the enclosure, Inej saw
men storming onto the other walkway, pointing and shouting. But they
couldn’t very well shoot through two walls of bulletproof glass.
The glass was Grisha made. Nina had recognised it as soon as they’d passed
through the display –
Fjerdan might protected by Grisha skill – and the one thing harder than
Fabrikator glass was diamond.
The doors on both sides of the walkway were rattling now. “They’re
coming!” Inej said.
Wylan secured the diamond bit to the makeshift drill. It made a scraping
sound as they placed it up against the glass, and Jesper began turning the
handle. The progress was painfully slow.
“Is it even working?” Inej cried.
“The glass is thick!”
Something smashed into the door on their right. “They have a battering
ram,” Wylan moaned.
“Keep going,” urged Inej. She toed off her shoes.
Jesper turned the crank faster as the drill bit whirred. He began to move it in
a curving line, sketching the beginnings of a circle, then a half moon.
Faster.
The wood of the door at the end of the walkway started to splinter.
“Take the handle, Wylan!” Jesper shouted.
Wylan took his place, turning the drill as fast as he could.
Jesper grabbed the fallen guards’ guns and pointed them at the door.
“They’re coming!” he yelled.
On the glass, the two lines met. The moon was full. The circle popped free,
tipping inwards. It hadn’t even struck the floor before Inej was backing up.
“Out of the way!” she demanded.
Then she was running, her feet light, her silks like feathers. In this moment
she didn’t mind them.
She’d duped Heleen Van Houden. She’d taken a little piece of her away, a
silly symbol, but one she prized. It wasn’t enough – it would never be
enough – but it was a beginning. There would be other bawds to trick,
slavers to fool. Her silks were feathers, and she was free.
Inej focused on that circle of glass – a moon, an absence of moon, a door to
the future – and she leaped. The hole was barely big enough for her body,
she heard the soft swish as the sharp glass rim sliced through the silks she
trailed. She arced her body and reached. She would have only one
opportunity to grab for the iron lantern that hung from the ceiling of the
enclosure. It was an impossible leap, a mad leap, but she was once again her
father ’s daughter, unbound by the rules of gravity. She hung in the air for a
terrifying moment, and then her hands grasped the lantern’s base.
Behind her, she heard the door in the walkway burst open, gunfire. Hold
them off, Jesper. Buy me time.
She swung back and forth, building momentum. A bullet zinged past her.
Accident? Or had someone made it past Wylan and Jesper to shoot at her
through the hole?
When she had enough momentum, she let go. She hit the wall hard. There
was no graceful way around it, but her hands clung to the lip of the stone
ledge where the ancient axes were displayed.
From there it was easy: ledge to beam to lower ledge, and down with a dull
clang as her bare feet struck the roof of a massive tank. She slid into the
metal dome at its centre.
She turned one knob then the next, trying to find the right controls. Finally
one of the guns rolled upwards. She pulled on the trigger, and her whole
body shook as bullets rattled against the enclosure glass like hail, pinging
off in all directions. It was the best warning she could offer Jesper and
Wylan.
Inej could only hope she could get the big gun working. She wriggled down
in the cockpit of the tank. She rotated the only visible handle, and the nose
of the long gun tilted into place. The lever was there, just as Jesper had said
it would be. She gave it a hard pull. There was a surprisingly small click.
Then, for a long horrible moment, nothing happened. What if it isn’t
loaded? she thought. If Jesper’s right about this gun, then the Fjerdans
would be fools to keep this much firepower just lying around.
A thunk sounded from somewhere in the tank. She heard something rolling
towards her and had the terrifying thought that she’d done it wrong. The
mortar was going to roll right down that long barrel and explode in her lap.
Instead there was a hissing sound and a shriek like metal grinding against
metal. The big gun vibrated. A skull-rattling boom split the air with a puff
of dark grey smoke.
The mortar struck the glass, shattering it into thousands of glittering pieces.
Prettier than diamonds, Inej marvelled, hoping that Wylan and Jesper had
found time and space to take cover.
She waited for the dust to clear, her ears ringing badly. The glass wall was
gone. All was still. Then two ropes attached to the walkway rail swung
down, and Wylan and Jesper followed: Jesper like a limber insect, Wylan in
stops and starts, wiggling like a caterpillar trying to make its way out of a
cocoon.
“Ajor! ” Inej shouted in Fjerdan. Nina would be proud.
She cranked the gun around. On the other side of the remaining glass wall,
men were shouting from the walkway. As the barrel swivelled in their
direction, they scattered.
Inej heard footsteps and clanging as Jesper and Wylan climbed onto the
tank. Jesper ’s head appeared, hanging down from the dome. “You letting
me drive?”
“If you insist.”
She moved aside so he could climb behind the controls.
“Oh, hello, darling,” he said happily. He pulled another lever, and the
armoured wagon seemed to shudder to life around them, belching black
smoke. What kind of monster is this? Inej wondered.
“That noise!” she cried.
“That engine!” cackled Jesper.
Then they were moving – and not a horse in sight.
Gunfire sounded from above. Apparently, Wylan had found the controls.
“For Saints’ sake,” Jesper said to Inej. “Help him aim!”
She squeezed in next to Wylan in the domed turret and aimed the second
small gun, helping to lay down cover as guards burst into the enclosure.
Jesper was turning the tank, backing up as far as possible. He fired the big
gun once. The mortar smashed the enclosure glass, sailed past the walkway,
and struck the ringwall behind it. White dust and shards of stone scattered
everywhere. He fired again. The second mortar hit hard, cracks splintering
through the rock of the wall. Jesper had made a dent in the ringwall – a
sizeable one – but not a hole.
“Ready?” he called.
“Ready,” Inej and Wylan replied in unison. They ducked beneath the gun
turret. Wylan had scratches from the glass all over his cheeks and neck. He
was beaming. Inej grabbed his hands and squeezed. They’d come to the Ice
Court scurrying like rats. Live or die, they were going out like an army.
Inej heard a loud thunk, the plunk and clang of gears turning. The tank
roared; the sound was thunder trapped in a metal drum, clamouring to be let
out. It rolled back on its treads, then surged forwards. They charged ahead,
building momentum, faster and faster. The tank jounced – they must be out
of the enclosure.
“Hold tight!” shouted Jesper and they slammed into the Ice Court’s
legendary, impenetrable wall with a jaw-shattering crash. Inej and Wylan
flew back against the cockpit.
They were through. They rumbled over the road, the smatter and pop of
rifle fire fading behind them.
Inej heard a chuffing noise. She righted herself and looked up. Wylan was
laughing.
He’d pushed out of the niche of the dome and was looking back at the Ice
Court. When she joined him, she saw the hole in the ringwall – a dark blot
in all that white stone, men running through, firing futilely at the tank’s
dusty wake.
Wylan clutched his middle, still snorting laughter, and pointed downwards.
Trailing behind them was a banner, caught in the tank’s treads. Despite the
smears of mud and gunpowder burns, Inej could still make out the words:
STRYMAKTFJERDAN. Fjerdan might.
They emerged from the darkness, soaked, bruised, and gasping in the bright
light of the moon.
Nina’s entire body felt as if it had been pummelled. The remnants of the
baleen clustered in sticky gobs at the corners of her mouth. Her dress had
frayed to nearly nothing, and if she hadn’t been so desperately, giddily
happy to be alive and breathing, she might have worried about the fact that
she was standing barefoot and practically naked in the gorge of a northern
river, still a mile and a half from the harbour and safety. In the distance, she
could hear the bells of the Ice Court ringing.
Kuwei was coughing water, and Matthias was dragging a limp, unconscious
Kaz out of the shallows.
“Saints, is he breathing?” asked Nina.
Matthias flipped him onto his back none too gently and started pressing
down on his chest with more force than was strictly necessary.
“I. Should. Let. You. Die,” Matthias muttered in time with his
compressions.
Nina crawled over the rocks and kneeled beside them, “Let me help before
you crack his sternum.
Does he have a pulse?” She pressed her fingers to his throat. “It’s there, but
it’s fading. Get his shirt open.”
Matthias helped tear the drüskelle uniform away. Nina placed one hand on
Kaz’s pale chest, focusing on his heart and forcing it to contract. She used
the other to pinch his nose shut and push his mouth open as she tried to
breathe air into his lungs. More skilled Corporalki could extract the water
themselves, but she didn’t have time to fret over her lack of training.
“Will he live?” Kuwei asked.
I don’t know. She pressed her lips to Kaz’s again, timing her breaths with
the beats she demanded of his heart. Come on, you rotten Barrel thug.
You’ve fought your way out of tougher scrapes.
She felt the shift when Kaz’s heart took over its own rhythm. Then he
coughed, chest spasming, water spewing from his mouth.
He shoved her off of him, sucking in air.
“Get away from me,” he gasped, wiping his gloved hand over his mouth.
Kaz’s eyes were unfocused. He seemed to be staring right through her.
“Don’t touch me.”
“You’re in shock, demjin,” Matthias said. “You almost drowned. You
should have drowned.”
Kaz coughed again, and his entire body shuddered. “Drowned,” he
repeated.
Nina nodded slowly. “Ice Court, remember? Impossible heist? Near death?
Three million kruge waiting for you in Ketterdam?”
Kaz blinked and his eyes cleared. “Four million.”
“I thought that might bring you around.”
He scrubbed his hands over his face, wet coughs still rattling his chest. “We
made it,” he said in wonder. “Djel performs miracles.”
“You don’t deserve miracles,” said Matthias with a scowl. “You desecrated
the sacred ash.”
Kaz pushed to his feet, staggered slightly, drew in another shaky breath.
“It’s a symbol, Helvar. If your god is so delicate, maybe you should get a
new one. Let’s get out of here.”
Nina threw up her hands. “You’re welcome, you ungrateful wretch.”
“I’ll thank you when we’re aboard the Ferolind. Move.” He was already
dragging himself up the boulders that lined the far side of the gorge. “You
can explain why our illustrious Shu scientist looks like one of Wylan’s
school pals along the way.”
Nina shook her head, caught between annoyance and admiration. Maybe
that was what it took to survive in the Barrel. You could never stop.
“He’s a friend?” asked Kuwei in skeptical Shu.
“On occasion.”
Matthias helped her to her feet, and they all followed after Kaz, making
slow progress up the rocky walls of the gorge that would lead them to the
other end of the bridge above, and a bit closer to Djerholm. Nina had never
been so exhausted, but she couldn’t let herself rest. They had the prize.
They’d got further than any crew. They’d blown up a building at the heart
of the Ice Court. But they’d never make it to the harbour without Inej and
the others.
She kept moving. The only other option was to sit down on a boulder and
wait for the end. A rumbling began from somewhere in the direction of the
Ice Court.
“Oh, Saints, please let that be Jesper,” she pleaded as they pulled
themselves over the lip of the gorge and looked back at the bridge festooned
with ribbons and ash boughs for Hringkälla.
“Whatever is coming, it’s big,” said Matthias.
“What do we do, Kaz?”
“Wait,” he said as the sound grew louder.
“How about ‘take cover ’?” Nina asked, bouncing nervously from foot to
foot. “‘Have heart’? ‘I stashed twenty rifles in this convenient shrubbery’?
Give us something.”
“How about a few million kruge?” said Kaz.
A tank rumbled over the hill, dust and gravel spewing from its treads.
Someone was waving to them from its gun turret – no, two someones. Inej
and Wylan were yelling and gesturing wildly from behind the dome.
Nina let out a victorious whoop as Matthias stared in disbelief. When Nina
looked at Kaz, she couldn’t quite believe her eyes. “Saints, Kaz, you
actually look happy.”
“Don’t be ridiculous,” he snapped. But there was no mistaking it. Kaz
Brekker was grinning like an idiot.
“I’m assuming we know them?” asked Kuwei.
But Nina’s elation dimmed as Fjerda’s answer to the problem of the Dregs
rolled over the horizon.
A column of tanks had crested the hill and was crashing down the moonlit
road, dust rising in plumes from their treads. Maybe Jesper hadn’t got the
drüskelle gate sealed. Or maybe they’d had tanks waiting on the grounds.
Given the firepower contained behind the Ice Court’s walls, she supposed
they should count themselves lucky. But it sure didn’t feel that way.
It wasn’t until Inej and Wylan were thundering over the trestles of the
bridge that Nina could make out what they were yelling: “Get out of the
way!”
They leaped from the path as the tank roared past them, then came to a
gear-grinding stop.
“We have a tank,” marvelled Nina. “Kaz, you creepy little genius, the plan
worked. You got us a tank.”
“They got us a tank.”
“We have one,” Matthias said, then pointed at the horde of metal and smoke
bearing down on them.
“They have a lot more.”
“Yeah, but you know what they don’t have?” Kaz asked as Jesper rotated
the tank’s giant gun. “A bridge.”
A metallic shriek went up from the armoured insides of the tank. Then a
violent, bone-shaking boom sounded. Nina heard a high whistling as
something shot through the air past them and collided with the bridge. The
first two trestles exploded into flame, sparks and timber plummeting into
the gorge below. The big gun fired again. With a groan, the trestles
collapsed completely.
If the Fjerdans wanted to cross the gorge, they were going to have to fly.
“We have a tank and a moat,” said Nina.
“Climb on!” crowed Wylan.
They boosted themselves onto the sides of the tank, clutching at any groove
or lip in the metal for dear life, and then they were rolling down the road
towards the harbour at top speed.
As they roared past the streetlamps, people emerged from their houses to
see what was happening.
Nina tried to imagine what their wild crew must look like to these Fjerdans.
What did they see as they poked their heads out of windows and doorways?
A group of hooting kids clinging to a tank painted with the Fjerdan flag and
charging along like some deranged float gone astray from its parade; a girl
in purple silk and a boy with red-gold curls poking out from behind the
guns; four soaked people holding tight to the sides for dear life – a Shu boy
in prison clothes, two bedraggled drüskelle, and Nina, a half-naked girl in
shreds of teal chiffon shouting, “We have a moat!”
When they entered the town, Matthias called, “Wylan, tell Jesper to keep to
the western streets.”
Wylan ducked down, and the tank veered west.
“It’s the warehouse district,” Matthias explained. “Deserted at night.”
The tank clattered and clanked over the cobblestones, swinging right and
left over kerbs and back again to avoid the few pedestrians, then sped into
the harbour district, past taverns and shops and shipping offices.
Kuwei tilted his head back, his face bright with joy. “I can smell the sea,”
he said happily.
Nina could smell it, too. The lighthouse gleamed in the distance. Two more
blocks and they’d be at the quay and freedom. Thirty million kruge. With
her share and Matthias’ they could go anywhere they wanted, live any life
they chose.
“Almost there!” cried Wylan.
They rounded a corner, and Nina’s stomach dropped.
“Stop!” she shouted. “Stop!”
She needn’t have bothered. The tank jolted to a halt, nearly flinging Nina
from her perch. The quay lay directly before them, and beyond it the
harbour, the flags of a thousand ships snapping in the breeze. The hour was
late. The quay should have been empty. Instead, it was crowded with
troops, row after row of them in grey uniforms, two hundred soldiers at
least – and every barrel of every gun was pointed directly at them.
Nina could still hear the bells of the Elderclock. She looked over her
shoulder. The Ice Court loomed over the harbour, perched on the cliff like a
sullen gull with feathers ruffled, its white stone walls lit from below,
glowing against the night sky.
“What is this?” Wylan asked Matthias. “You never said—”
“They must have changed deployment procedure.”
“Everything else was the same.”
“I’ve never seen Black Protocol engaged,” Matthias growled. “Maybe they
always had troops stationed in the harbour. I don’t know.”
“Be quiet,” Inej said. “Just stop.”
Nina jumped as a voice echoed over the crowd. It spoke first in Fjerdan,
then Ravkan, then Kerch, and finally Shu. “Release the prisoner Kuwei YulBo. Put down your weapons and step away from the tank.”
“They can’t just open fire,” said Matthias. “They won’t risk hurting
Kuwei.”
“They don’t have to,” said Nina. “Look.”
An emaciated prisoner was being led through the rows of soldiers. His hair
was matted to his forehead. He wore a ragged red kefta and was clutching
the sleeve of the guard closest to him, lips moving feverishly as if imparting
some desperate wisdom. Nina knew he was begging for parem.
“A Heartrender,” Matthias said grimly.
“But he’s so far away,” protested Wylan.
Nina shook her head. “It won’t matter.” Had they kept him down here with
whatever troops were
posted in lower Djerholm? Why not? He was a weapon better than any gun
or tank.
“I can see the Ferolind,” murmured Inej. She pointed down the docks, just a
little way off. It took Nina a moment, but then she picked out the Kerch flag
and the cheery Haanraadt Bay pennant flying beneath it. They were so
close.
Jesper could shoot the Heartrender. They could try barrelling through the
troops with the tank, but they would never make it to the ship. The Fjerdans
would gladly risk Kuwei’s life before they ever let him fall into anyone
else’s hands.
“Kaz?” called Jesper from inside the tank. “This would be a really good
time to say you saw this coming.”
Kaz looked out over the sea of soldiers. “I didn’t see this coming.” He
shook his head. “You told me one day I’d run out of tricks, Helvar. Looks
like you were right.” The words were for Matthias, but his eyes were on
Inej.
“I’ve had my fill of captivity,” she said. “They won’t take me alive.”
“Me neither,” said Wylan.
Jesper snorted from inside the tank. “We really need to get him more
suitable friends.”
“Better to go out with fists swinging than let some Fjerdan put me on a
pike,” said Kaz.
Matthias nodded. “Then we agree. We end this here.”
“No,” Nina whispered. They all turned to her.
The voice echoed out from the Fjerdan ranks once more. “You have a count
of ten to comply. I repeat: Release the prisoner Kuwei Yul-Bo and surrender
yourselves. Ten …”
Nina spoke to Kuwei rapidly in Shu.
“You don’t understand,” he replied. “A single dose—”
“I understand,” she said. But the others didn’t. Not until they saw Kuwei
produce a little leather pouch from his pocket. Its rim was stained with rustcoloured powder.
“No!” Matthias shouted. He grabbed for the parem, but Nina was faster.
The Fjerdan voice droned on: “Seven …”
“Nina, don’t be stupid,” said Inej. “You’ve seen—”
“Some people don’t get addicted after the first dose.”
“It isn’t worth the risk.”
“Six …”
“Kaz is out of tricks.” She plucked open the pouch. “But I’m not.”
“Nina, please,” Matthias begged. She’d seen the same anguish on his face
that day in Elling when he thought she’d betrayed him. In a way, she was
doing the same thing now, abandoning him once more.
“Five …”
The first dose was the strongest, wasn’t that what they’d said? The high and
the power could never be replicated. She’d be chasing it for the rest of her
life. Or maybe she’d be stronger than the drug.
“Four …”
She touched Matthias’ cheek briefly. “If it gets bad, find a way to end it,
Helvar. I’m trusting you to do the right thing.” She smiled. “Again.”
“Three …”
Then she tossed her head back and poured the parem into her mouth,
downing it in a single hard swallow. It had the sweet, burnt taste of the
jurda blossoms she knew, but there was another flavour, too, one she
couldn’t quite identify.
She stopped thinking.
Her blood began to thrum, and her heart was suddenly pounding. The world
broke up into tiny flashes of light. She could see the true colour of
Matthias’ eyes, pure blue beneath the flecks of grey and brown she’d put
there, the moonlight gleaming off every hair on his head. She saw the sweat
on Kaz’s brow, the nearly invisible pinpricks of the tattoo on his forearm.
She looked out over the lines of Fjerdan soldiers. She could hear their
hearts beating. She could see their neurons firing, feel their impulses
forming. Everything made sense. Their bodies were a map of cells, a
thousand equations, solved by the second, by the millisecond, and she knew
only answers.
“Nina?” Matthias whispered.
“Move,” Nina said, and she saw her voice in the air.
She sensed the Heartrender in the crowd, the movement of his throat as he
swallowed his dose. He would be the first.
“Two … one …”
Matthias saw Nina’s pupils dilate. Her lips parted, and she pushed past him,
stepping down from the tank. The air around her seemed to crackle, her skin
glowing as if lit from within by something miraculous. As if she’d tapped a
vein of Djel directly, and now the god’s power flowed through her.
She went for the Heartrender immediately. Nina flicked her wrist, and his
eyes exploded in his head. He crumpled without a sound. “Be free,” she
said.
Nina glided towards the soldiers. Matthias moved to protect her as he saw
rifles raised. She lifted her hands. “Stop,” she said.
They froze.
“Lay down your arms.” As one they obeyed her.
“Sleep,” she commanded. Nina swept her hands in an arc, and the soldiers
toppled without protest, row after row, stalks of wheat felled by an invisible
scythe.
The air was eerily still. Slowly, Wylan and Inej climbed down from the
tank. Jesper and the rest followed, and they stood in stunned silence, all
language dissolved by what they’d witnessed, gazing out at the field of
fallen bodies. It had happened so quickly.
There was no way to reach the harbour unless they walked over the
soldiers. Without a word, they began to pick their way through, the hush
broken only by the faraway bells of the Elderclock.
Matthias laid his hand on Nina’s arm, and she released a little sigh, letting
him lead her.
Beyond the quay, the docks were deserted. As the others headed towards
the Ferolind, Matthias and Nina trailed behind. Matthias could see Rotty
clinging to the mast, jaw slack with fear. Specht was waiting to unmoor the
ship, and the look on his face was equally terrified.
“Matthias!”
He turned. A group of drüskelle stood on the quay, their uniforms soaked,
their black hoods raised.
They wore masks of dully gleaming grey chainmail over their faces, their
features obscured by the mesh. But Matthias recognised Jarl Brum’s voice
when he spoke.
“Traitor,” Brum said from behind his mask. “Betrayer of your country and
your god. You will not leave this harbour alive. None of you will.” His men
must have got him out of the treasury after the explosion. Had they
followed Matthias and Nina to the river beneath the ash? Had there been
horses or more tanks stationed in the upper town?
Nina raised her hands. “For Matthias, I will give you one chance to leave us
be.”
“You cannot control us, witch,” said Brum. “Our hoods, our masks, every
stitch of clothing we wear is reinforced with Grisha steel. Corecloth created
to our specifications by Grisha Fabrikators under our control and designed
for just this purpose. You cannot force us to your will. You cannot harm us.
This game is at an end.”
Nina lifted a hand. Nothing happened, and Matthias knew what Brum was
saying was true.
“Go!” Matthias shouted at them. “Please! You—”
Brum lifted his gun and fired. The bullet struck Matthias directly in the
chest. The pain was sudden and terrible – and then gone. Before his eyes, he
saw the bullet emerge from his chest. It hit the ground with a plink. He
pulled his shirt open. There was no wound.
Nina was walking past him. “No!” he cried.
The drüskelle opened fire on her. He saw her flinch as the bullets struck her
body, saw red blooms of blood appear on her chest, her breasts, her bare
thighs. But she did not fall. As fast as the bullets tore through her body, she
healed herself, and the shells fell harmlessly to the dock.
The drüskelle gaped at Nina. She laughed. “You’ve grown too used to
captive Grisha. We’re quite tame in our cages.”
“There are other means,” said Brum, pulling a long whip like the one Lars
had used from his belt.
“Your power cannot touch us, witch, and our cause is true.”
“I can’t touch you,” said Nina, raising her hands. “But I can reach them just
fine.”
Behind the drüskelle, the Fjerdan soldiers Nina had put to sleep rose, their
faces blank. One tore the whip from Brum’s hand, the others snatched the
hoods and masks from the startled drüskelle’s faces, rendering them
vulnerable.
Nina flexed her fingers, and the drüskelle dropped their rifles, hands going
to their heads, screaming in pain.
“For my country,” she said. “For my people. For every child you put to the
pyre. Reap what you’ve sown, Jarl Brum.”
Matthias watched the drüskelle twitch and convulse, blood trickling from
their ears and eyes as the other Fjerdan soldiers looked on impassively.
Their screams were a chorus. Claas, who had drunk too much with him in
Avfalle. Giert, who’d trained his wolf to eat from his hand. They were
monsters, he knew it, but boys as well, boys like him – taught to hate, to
fear.
“Nina,” he said, hand still pressed over the smooth skin on his chest where
a bullet wound should be. “Nina, please.”
“You know they would not offer you mercy, Matthias.”
“I know. I know. But let them live in shame instead.”
She hesitated.
“Nina, you taught me to be something better. They could be taught, too.”
Nina shifted her gaze to his. Her eyes were ferocious, the deep green of
forests; the pupils, dark wells. The air around her seemed to shimmer with
power, as if she was alight with some secret flame.
“They fear you as I once feared you,” he said. “As you once feared me. We
are all someone’s monster, Nina.”
For a long moment, she studied his face. At last, she dropped her arms, and
the ranks of drüskelle crumpled to the ground, whimpering. Her hand shot
out once more, and Brum shrieked. He clapped his hands to his head, blood
trickling between his fingers.
“He’ll live?” Matthias asked.
“Yes,” she said as she stepped onto the schooner. “He’ll just be very bald.”
Specht shouted commands, and the Ferolind drifted into the harbour,
picking up speed as the sails swelled with wind. No one ran to the docks to
stop them. No ships or cannon fired. There was no one to give warning, no
one to signal to the gunnery above. The Elderclock chimed on unheeded as
the schooner vanished into the vast black shelter of the sea, leaving only
suffering in her wake.
They’d been blessed with a strong wind. Inej felt it ripple through her hair
and couldn’t help but think of the storm to come.
As soon as they were on deck, Matthias had turned to Kuwei.
“How long does she have?”
Kuwei had some Kerch, but Nina had to translate in places. She did it
distractedly, her glittering eyes roving over everyone and everything.
“The high will last one hour, maybe two. It depends how long it takes her
body to process a dose of that size.”
“Why can’t you just purge it from your body like the bullets?” Matthias
asked Nina desperately.
“It doesn’t work,” said Kuwei. “Even if she could overcome the craving for
long enough to start purging it from her body, she’ll lose the ability to pull
the parem from her system before it’s all gone.
You’d need another Corporalnik using parem to accomplish it.”
“What will it do to her?” asked Wylan.
“You’ve seen for yourself,” Matthias replied bitterly. “We know what’s
going to happen.”
Kaz crossed his arms, “How will it start?”
“Body aches, chills, no worse than a mild illness,” Kuwei explained. “Then
a kind of hypersensitivity, followed by tremors, and the craving.”
“Do you have more of the parem?” Matthias asked.
“Yes.”
“Enough to get her back to Ketterdam?”
“I won’t take more,” Nina protested.
“I have enough to keep you comfortable,” Kuwei said. “But if you take a
second dose, there is no hope at all.” He looked to Matthias. “This is her
one chance. It’s possible her body will purge enough of it naturally that
addiction won’t set in.”
“And if it does?”
Kuwei held out his hands, part shrug, part apology. “Without a ready supply
of the drug, she’ll go mad. With it, her body will simply wear itself out. Do
you know the word parem? It’s the name my father gave to the drug. It
means ‘without pity’.”
When Nina finished translating, there was a long pause.
“I don’t want to hear any more,” she said. “None of it will change what’s
coming.”
She drifted away towards the prow. Matthias watched her go.
“The water hears and understands,” he murmured beneath his breath.
Inej sought out Rotty and got him to dig up the wool coats she and Nina had
left behind in favour of their cold weather gear when they’d landed on the
northern shore. She found Nina near the prow, gazing out at the sea.
“One hour, maybe two,” Nina said without turning.
Inej halted in shock. “You heard me approach?” No one heard the Wraith,
especially over the sound of the wind and sea.
“Don’t worry. It wasn’t those silent feet that gave you away. I can hear your
pulse, your breathing.”
“And you knew it was me?”
“Every heart sounds different. I never realised that before.”
Inej joined her at the rail and handed over Nina’s coat. The Grisha put it on,
though the cold didn’t seem to be bothering her. Above them, the stars
shone bright between silver-seeded drifts of cloud.
Inej was ready for dawn, ready for this long night to be over, and the
journey, too. She was surprised to find she was eager to see Ketterdam
again. She wanted an omelette, a mug of too-sweet coffee. She wanted to
hear the rain on the rooftops and sit snug and warm in her tiny room at the
Slat. There were adventures to come, but they could wait until she’d had a
hot bath – maybe a few of them.
Nina buried her face in her coat’s woollen collar and said, “I wish you could
see what I do. I can hear every body on this ship, the blood rushing through
their veins. I can hear the change in Kaz’s breathing when he looks at you.”
“You … you can?”
“It catches every time, like he’s never seen you before.”
“And what about Matthias?” Inej asked, eager to change the subject.
Nina raised a brow, unfooled. “Matthias is afraid for me, but his heart
thumps a steady rhythm no matter what he’s feeling. So Fjerdan, so
orderly.”
“I didn’t think you’d let those men live, back at the harbour.”
“I’m not sure it was the right thing to do. I’ll become one more Grisha
horror story for them to tell their children.”
“Behave or Nina Zenik will get you?”
Nina considered. “Well, I do like the sound of that.”
Inej leaned back on the railing and peered at Nina. “You look radiant.”
“It won’t last.”
“It never does.” Then Inej’s smile faltered. “Are you afraid?”
“Terrified.”
“We’ll all be here with you.”
Nina took a wobbly breath and nodded.
Inej had made countless alliances in Ketterdam, but few friends. She rested
her head against Nina’s shoulder. “If I were a Suli seer,” she said, “I could
look into the future and tell you it will be all right.”
“Or that I’m going to die in agony.” Nina pressed her cheek against the top
of Inej’s head. “Tell me something good anyway.”
“It will be all right,” Inej said. “You’ll survive this. And then you’re going
to be very, very rich.
You’ll sing sea shanties and drinking songs nightly in an East Stave cabaret,
and you’ll bribe everyone to give you standing ovations after every song.”
Nina laughed softly. “Let’s buy the Menagerie.”
Inej grinned, thinking of the future and her little ship. “Let’s buy it and burn
it down.”
They watched the waves for a while. “Ready?” Nina said.
Inej was glad she hadn’t had to ask. She pushed up her sleeve, baring the
peacock feather and mottled skin beneath it.
It took the barest second, the softest brush of Nina’s fingertips. The itch was
acute but passed quickly. When the prickling faded, the skin of Inej’s
forearm was perfect—almost too smooth and flawless, like it was the one
new part of her.
Inej touched the soft skin. Just like that it was done. If only every wound
could be banished so easily.
Nina kissed Inej’s cheek. “I’m going to find Matthias before things get
bad.”
But as she walked away, Inej saw Nina had another reason to depart. Kaz
was standing in the shadows near the mast. He had a heavy coat on and was
leaning on his crow-head cane – he looked almost like himself again. Inej’s
knives would be waiting in the hold with her other belongings. She’d
missed her claws.
Kaz murmured a few words to Nina, and the Grisha reared back in surprise.
Inej couldn’t make out the rest of what they said, but she could tell the
exchange was tense before Nina made an exasperated sound and vanished
belowdecks.
“What did you say to Nina?” Inej asked when he joined her at the rail.
“I have a job I need her to perform.”
“She’s about to go through a terrifying ordeal—”
“And work still needs to get done.”
Pragmatic Kaz. Why let empathy get in the way? Maybe Nina would be
glad for the distraction.
They stood together, gazing out at the waves, silence stretching between
them.
“We’re alive,” he said at last.
“It seems you prayed to the right god.”
“Or travelled with the right people.”
Inej shrugged. “Who chooses our paths?” He said nothing, and she had to
smile. “No sharp retort?
No laughing at my Suli proverbs?”
He ran his gloved thumb over the rail. “No.”
“How will we meet the Merchant Council?”
“When we’re a few miles out, Rotty and I will row to harbour in the
longboat. We’ll find a runner to get word to Van Eck and make the
exchange on Vellgeluk.”
Inej shivered. The island was popular with slavers and smugglers. “The
Council’s choice or yours?”
“Van Eck suggested it.”
Inej frowned. “Why does a mercher know about Vellgeluk?”
“Trade is trade. Maybe Van Eck isn’t quite the upstanding merch he seems.”
They were silent for a while. Finally, she said, “I’m going to learn to sail.”
Kaz’s brow furrowed, and he cast her a surprised glance. “Really? Why?”
“I want to use my money to hire a crew and outfit a ship.” Saying the words
wrapped her breath up in an anxious spool. Her dream still felt fragile. She
didn’t want to care what Kaz thought, but she did.
“I’m going to hunt slavers.”
“Purpose,” he said thoughtfully. “You know you can’t stop them all.”
“If I don’t try, I won’t stop any.”
“Then I almost pity the slavers,” Kaz said. “They have no idea what’s
coming for them.”
A pleased flush warmed her cheeks. But hadn’t Kaz always believed she
was dangerous?
Inej balanced her elbows on the railing and rested her chin in her palms.
“I’ll go home first, though.”
“To Ravka?”
She nodded.
“To find your family.”
“Yes.” Only two days ago, she would have left it at that, respecting their
unspoken agreement to tread lightly in each other ’s pasts. Now she said,
“Was there no one but your brother, Kaz? Where are your mother and
father?”
“Barrel boys don’t have parents. We’re born in the harbour and crawl out of
the canals.”
Inej shook her head. She watched the sea shift and sigh, each wave a breath.
She could just make out the horizon, the barest difference between black
sky and blacker sea. She thought of her parents.
She’d been away from them for nearly three years. How would they have
changed? Could she be their daughter again? Maybe not right away. But she
wanted to sit with her father on the steps of the wagon eating fruit from the
trees. She wanted to see her mother dust chalk from her hands before she
prepared the evening meal. She wanted tall southern grasses and the vast
sky above the Sikurzoi Mountains. Something she needed was waiting for
her there. What did Kaz need?
“You’re about to be rich, Kaz. What will you do when there’s no more
blood to shed or vengeance to take?”
“There’s always more.”
“More money, more mayhem, more scores to settle. Was there never
another dream?”
He said nothing. What had carved all the hope from his heart? She might
never know.
Inej turned to go. Kaz seized her hand, keeping it on the railing. He didn’t
look at her. “Stay,” he said, his voice rough stone. “Stay in Ketterdam. Stay
with me.”
She looked down at his gloved hand clutching hers. Everything in her
wanted to say yes, but she would not settle for so little, not after all she’d
been through. “What would be the point?”
He took a breath. “I want you to stay. I want you to … I want you.”
“You want me.” She turned the words over. Gently, she squeezed his hand.
“And how will you have me, Kaz?”
He looked at her then, eyes fierce, mouth set. It was the face he wore when
he was fighting.
“How will you have me?” she repeated. “Fully clothed, gloves on, your
head turned away so our
lips can never touch?”
He released her hand, his shoulders bunching, his gaze angry and ashamed
as he turned his face to the sea.
Maybe it was because his back was to her that she could finally speak the
words. “I will have you without armour, Kaz Brekker. Or I will not have
you at all.”
Speak, she begged silently. Give me a reason to stay. For all his selfishness
and cruelty, Kaz was still the boy who had saved her. She wanted to believe
he was worth saving, too.
The sails creaked. The clouds parted for the moon then gathered back
around her.
Inej left Kaz with the wind howling and dawn still a long while away.
The aches set in after dawn. An hour later, it felt as if her bones were trying
to push through the places where her joints met. She lay on the same table
where she’d healed Inej’s knife wound. Her senses were still sharp enough
that she could smell the coppery scent of the Suli girl’s blood beneath the
cleaner Rotty had used to remove it from the wood. It smelled like Inej.
Matthias sat beside her. He’d tried to take her hand, but the pain was too
great. The chafe of his skin on hers made her flesh feel raw. Everything
looked wrong. Everything felt wrong. All she could think of was the sweet,
burnt taste of the parem. Her throat itched. Her skin felt like an enemy.
When the tremors began, she begged him to leave.
“I don’t want you to see me like this,” she said, trying to roll on her side.
He brushed the damp hair from her brow. “How bad is it?”
“Bad.” But she knew it would get worse.
“Do you want to try the jurda? ” Kuwei had suggested that small doses of
regular jurda might help Nina get through the day.
She shook her head. “I want … I want – Saints, why is it so hot in here?”
Then, despite the pain, she tried to sit up. “Don’t give me another dose.
Whatever I say, Matthias, no matter how much I beg. I don’t want to be like
Nestor, like those Grisha in the cells.”
“Nina, Kuwei said the withdrawal could kill you. I won’t let you die.”
Kuwei. Back at the treasury Matthias had said, He’s one of us. She liked that
word. Us. A word without divisions or borders. It seemed full of hope.
She flopped back down, and her whole body rebelled. Her clothes were
crushed glass. “I would have killed every one of the drüskelle.”
“We all carry our sins, Nina. I need you to live so I can atone for mine.”
“You can do that without me, you know.”
He buried his head in his hands. “I don’t want to.”
“Matthias,” she said, running her fingers through the close crop of his hair.
It hurt. The world hurt.
Touching him hurt, but she still did it. She might not ever get to again. “I
am not sorry.”
He took her hand and kissed her knuckles gently. She winced, but when he
tried to pull away, she clutched him tighter.
“Stay,” she panted. Tears leaked from her eyes. “Stay till the end.”
“And after,” he said. “And always.”
“I want to feel safe again. I want to go home to Ravka.”
“Then I’ll take you there. We’ll set fire to raisins or whatever you heathens
do for fun.”
“Zealot,” she said weakly.
“Witch.”
“Barbarian.”
“Nina,” he whispered, “little red bird. Don’t go.”
As the schooner sped south, it was as if the whole crew was sitting vigil.
Everyone spoke in hushed tones, treading quietly over the decks. Jesper was
as worried about Nina as anyone – except Matthias, he supposed – but the
respectful silence was hard to bear. He needed something to shoot at.
The Ferolind felt like a ghost ship. Matthias was sequestered with Nina, and
he’d asked for Wylan’s help in caring for her. Even if Wylan didn’t love
chemistry, he knew more about tinctures and compounds than anyone in the
crew other than Kuwei, and Matthias couldn’t understand half of what
Kuwei said. Jesper hadn’t seen Wylan since they’d fled the Djerholm
harbour, and he had to admit he missed having the merchling around to
annoy. Kuwei seemed friendly enough, but his Kerch was rough, and he
didn’t seem to like to talk much. Sometimes he’d just appear on deck at
night and stand silently beside Jesper, staring out at the waves. It was a little
unnerving. Only Inej wanted to chat with anyone, and that was because she
seemed to have developed a consuming interest in all things nautical. She
spent most of her time with Specht and Rotty, learning knots and how to rig
sails.
Jesper had always known there was a good chance they wouldn’t make this
journey home at all, that they’d end up in cells in the Ice Court or skewered
on pikes. But he’d figured that if they managed the impossible task of
rescuing Yul-Bayur and getting to the Ferolind, the trip back to Ketterdam
would be a party. They’d drink whatever Specht might have squirreled
away on the ship, eat the last of Nina’s toffees, recount their close calls and
every small victory. But he never could have foreseen the way they’d been
cornered in the harbour, and he certainly couldn’t have imagined what Nina
had done to get them out of it.
Jesper worried about Nina, but thinking about her made him feel guilty.
When they’d boarded the schooner and Kuwei explained parem, a tiny
voice inside him said he should offer to take the drug as well. Even though
he was a Fabrikator without training, maybe he could have helped to draw
the parem out of Nina’s system and set her free. But that was a hero’s voice,
and Jesper had long since stopped thinking he had the makings of a hero.
Hell, a hero would have volunteered to take the parem when they were
facing down the Fjerdans at the harbour.
When Kerch finally appeared on the horizon, Jesper felt a strange mixture
of relief and trepidation. Their lives were about to change in ways that still
didn’t seem real.
They dropped anchor, and when nightfall came, Jesper asked Kaz if he
could join him and Rotty in the longboat they were rowing to Fifth Harbour.
They didn’t need him along, but Jesper was desperate for distraction.
The chaos of Ketterdam was unchanged – ships unloading their cargo at the
docks, tourists and soldiers on leave pouring out of boats, laughing and
shouting to each other on their way to the Barrel.
“Looks the same as when we left it,” Jesper said.
Kaz raised a brow. He was back in his sleek grey-and-black suit,
immaculate tie. “What did you expect?”
“I don’t know exactly,” Jesper admitted.
But he felt different, even with the familiar weight of his pearl-handled
revolvers at his hips and a rifle on his back. He kept thinking of the
Tidemaker woman, screaming in the drüskelle courtyard, her face speckled
black. He looked down at his hands. Did he want to be a Fabrikator? To live
as one?
He couldn’t help what he was, but did he want to cultivate his power or
keep hiding it?
Kaz left Rotty and Jesper at the dock while he went to find a runner to take
a message to Van Eck.
Jesper wanted to go with him, but Kaz told him to stay put. Annoyed,
Jesper took the chance to stretch his legs, aware of Rotty observing him. He
had the distinct sense that Kaz had told Rotty to keep him under watch. Did
Kaz think he was going to bolt straight to the nearest gambling hall?
He looked up at the cloudy sky. Why not admit it? He was tempted. He was
itching for a hand of cards. Maybe he really should get out of Ketterdam.
Once he had his money and his debts were paid, he could go anywhere in
the world. Even Ravka. Hopefully, Nina would recover, and when she was
back to herself, Jesper could sit down with her and figure it out. No
commitments right away, but he could at least visit, couldn’t he?
A half hour later, Kaz returned with a message confirming that
representatives from the Merchant Council would meet them on Vellgeluk
at dawn the following day.
“Look at that,” Kaz said, holding the paper out for Jesper to read. Beneath
the details of the meet it said, Congratulations. Your country thanks you.
The words left a funny feeling in Jesper ’s chest, but he laughed and said,
“As long as my country pays cash. Does the Council know the scientist is
dead?”
“I put it all in my note to Van Eck,” Kaz said. “I told him Bo Yul-Bayur is
dead, but that his son is alive and was working on jurda parem for the
Fjerdans.”
“Did he haggle?”
“Not in the note. He expressed his ‘deep concern’, but didn’t mention
anything about price. We did our job. We’ll see if he tries to bargain us
down when we get to Vellgeluk.”
As they rowed back to the Ferolind, Jesper asked, “Will Wylan come with
us to meet Van Eck?”
“No,” Kaz said, fingers drumming on the crow’s head of his cane.
“Matthias will be with us, and someone has to stay with Nina. Besides, if
we need to use Wylan to twist his father ’s arm, it’s better that we not show
our hand too early.”
It made sense. And whatever discord existed between Wylan and his father,
Jesper doubted Wylan wanted to hash it out in front of the Dregs and
Matthias.
He spent a restless night tossing in his hammock and woke to a muggy grey
dawn. There was no
wind, and the sea looked flat and glassy as a millpond.
“A stubborn sky,” murmured Inej, squinting out towards Vellgeluk. She was
right. There were no clouds on the horizon, but the air felt dense with
moisture, as if a storm was simply refusing to form.
Jesper scanned the empty deck. He’d assumed Wylan would come up to see
them off, but Nina couldn’t be left on her own.
“How is she?” he asked Matthias.
“Weak,” said the Fjerdan. “She’s been unable to sleep. But we got her to
take some broth, and she seems to be keeping it down.”
Jesper knew he was being selfish and stupid, but some petty part of him
wondered if Wylan had deliberately kept away from him on the journey
back. Maybe now that the job was complete and he was on his way to his
share of the haul, Wylan was done slumming with criminals.
“Where’s the other longboat?” Jesper asked as he, Kaz, Matthias, Inej, and
Kuwei rowed out from the Ferolind with Rotty.
“Repairs,” said Kaz.
Vellgeluk was so flat it was barely visible once they were rowing through
the water. The island was less than a mile wide, a barren patch of sand and
rock distinguished only by the wrecked foundation of an old tower used by
the Council of Tides. Smugglers called it Vellgeluk, ‘good luck’, because of
the paintings still visible around the base of what would have been the
obelisk tower: golden circles meant to represent coins, symbols of favour
from Ghezen, the god of industry and commerce. Jesper and Kaz had come
to the island before to meet with smugglers. It was far from Ketterdam’s
ports, well outside the patrol of the harbour watch, with no buildings or
hidden coves from which to stage an ambush. An ideal meeting place for
wary parties.
A brigantine was moored off the island’s opposite shore, its sails hanging
limp and useless. Jesper had watched it make slow progress from
Ketterdam in the early dawn light, a tiny black dot that grew into a hulking
blot on the horizon. He could hear the sailors calling to each other as they
worked the oars. Now its crew lowered a longboat packed with men over
the side.
When their own longboat made shore, Jesper and the others leaped out to
pull it onto the sand.
Jesper checked his revolvers and saw Inej touch her fingers briefly to each
of her knives, lips moving. Matthias adjusted the rifle strapped to his back
and rolled his enormous shoulders. Kuwei watched it all in silence.
“All right,” Kaz said. “Let’s go get rich.”
“No mourners,” Rotty said, settling down to wait with the longboat.
“No funerals,” they replied.
They strode towards the centre of the island, Kuwei behind Kaz, bracketed
by Jesper and Inej. As they drew closer, Jesper saw someone in a black
mercher ’s suit approaching, accompanied by a tall Shu man, dark hair
bound at the nape of his neck, and followed by a contingent of the
stadwatch in purple coats, all carrying batons and repeating rifles. Two men
lugged a heavy trunk between them, staggering slightly with its weight.
“So that’s what thirty million kruge looks like,” said Kaz.
Jesper gave a low whistle. “Hopefully, the longboat won’t sink.”
“Just you, Van Eck?” Kaz asked the man in merch black. “The rest of the
Council couldn’t be bothered?”
So this was Jan Van Eck. He was leaner than Wylan, and his hairline was
higher, but Jesper could definitely see the resemblance.
“The Council felt I was best suited to this task, as we’ve had dealings
before.”
“Nice pin,” Kaz said with a glance at the ruby stuck to Van Eck’s tie. “Not
as nice as the other one, though.”
Van Eck’s lips pursed slightly. “The other was an heirloom. Well?” he said
to the Shu man beside him.
The Shu said, “That’s Kuwei Yul-Bo. It’s a year since I’ve seen him. He’s
quite a bit taller now, but he’s the spitting image of his father.” He said
something to Kuwei in Shu and gave a short bow.
Kuwei glanced at Kaz, then bowed in return. Jesper could see a sheen of
sweat on his brow.
Van Eck smiled. “I will confess I am surprised, Mister Brekker. Surprised
but delighted.”
“You didn’t think we’d succeed.”
“Let’s say I thought you were a longshot.”
“Is that why you hedged your bets?”
“Ah, so you’ve spoken to Pekka Rollins.”
“He’s quite a talker when you get him in the right frame of mind,” said Kaz,
and Jesper remembered the blood on Kaz’s shirt at the prison. “He said you
contracted him and the Dime Lions to go after Yul-Bayur for the Merchant
Council as well.”
With a niggle of unease, Jesper wondered what else Rollins might have told
Kaz.
Van Eck shrugged. “It was best to be safe.”
“And why should you care if a bunch of canal rats blow each other to bits in
pursuit of a prize?”
“We knew the odds of either team succeeding were small. As a gambler, I
hope you can understand.”
But Jesper had never thought of Kaz as a gambler. Gamblers left something
to chance.
“Thirty million kruge will soothe my hurt feelings,” said Kaz.
Van Eck gestured to the guards behind him. They hefted the trunk and set it
down in front of Kaz.
He crouched beside it and opened the lid. Even from a distance, Jesper
could see the stacks of bills in palest Kerch purple, emblazoned with the
three flying fish, row after row of them, bound in paper bands sealed with
wax.
Inej drew in a breath.
“Even your money is a peculiar colour,” said Matthias.
Jesper wanted to run his hands over those glorious stacks. He wanted to
take a bath in them. “I think my mouth just watered.”
Kaz pulled out one of the stacks and let his gloved thumb skim over it, then
dug down another layer to make sure Van Eck hadn’t tried to bunk them.
“It’s all here,” he said.
He looked over his shoulder and waved Kuwei forward. The boy crossed
the short distance, and
Van Eck gestured him over to his side, giving him a pat on the back.
Kaz rose. “Well, Van Eck. I’d like to say it’s been a pleasure, but I’m not
that good a liar. We’ll take our leave.”
Van Eck stepped in front of Kuwei and said, “I’m afraid I can’t allow that,
Mister Brekker.”
Kaz leaned on his cane, watching Van Eck keenly. “Is there a problem?”
“I count several right in front of me. And there’s no way any of you are
getting off this island.”
Van Eck pulled a whistle from his pocket and blew a shrill note. In the same
moment, his servants drew their weapons and a wind came out of nowhere
– a howling, unnatural gale that whirled around the little island as the sea
began to rise.
The sailors by the brigantine’s longboat lifted their arms, waves gathering
behind them.
“Tidemakers,” growled Matthias, reaching for his rifle.
Then two more figures launched themselves from the deck of the
brigantine.
“Squallers!” Jesper shouted. “They’re using parem!”
The Squallers circled in the sky, wind whipping the air around them.
“You kept part of the stash Bo sent to the Council,” said Kaz, dark eyes
narrowed.
The Squallers lifted their arms, and the wind wailed a high, keening cry.
Jesper reached for his revolvers. Hadn’t he wanted something to shoot at? I
guess this place is good luck, he thought with a rush of anticipation. Looks
like I’m about to get my wish.
“The deal is the deal, Van Eck,” Kaz said over the sounds of the growing
storm. “If the Merchant Council fails to honour its end of this bargain, no
one from the Barrel will ever traffic with any of you again. Your word will
be meaningless.”
“That would be a problem, Mister Brekker, if the Council knew anything
about this deal.”
Understanding came in a terrible flash. “They were never involved,” Kaz
said. Why had he believed Van Eck had the blessing of the Merchant
Council? Because he was a rich, upstanding mercher? Because he’d dressed
his own servants and soldiers in the purple uniforms of the stadwatch? Kaz
had met with Van Eck in a quarantined mercher ’s house, not a government
building, but he’d been taken in by a little set dressing. It was Hertzoon and
his coffeehouse all over again, only now Kaz was old enough to know
better.
“You wanted Yul-Bayur. You wanted the formula for parem.”
Van Eck conceded the truth with an easy nod. “Neutrality is a luxury Kerch
has too long enjoyed.
The members of the Council think that their wealth protects them, that they
can sit back and count their money while the world squabbles.”
“And you know better?”
“Indeed, I do. Jurda parem is not a secret that can be kept or quashed or
stashed in a cabin on the Zemeni frontier.”
“So all your talk of trade lines and markets collapsing—”
“Oh, it will all happen just as I predicted, Mister Brekker. I’m counting on
it. As soon as the Council received Bo Yul-Bayur ’s message, I began
buying up jurda fields in Novyi Zem. When parem is unleashed on the
world, every country, every government will be clamouring for a ready
supply of it to use on their Grisha.”
“Chaos,” said Matthias.
“Yes,” said Van Eck. “Chaos will come, and I will be its master. Its very
wealthy master.”
“You will be ensuring slavery and death for Grisha everywhere,” Inej said.
Van Eck raised a brow. “How old are you, girl? Sixteen? Seventeen?
Nations rise and fall. Markets are made and unmade. When power shifts,
someone always suffers.”
“When profit shifts,” Jesper shot back.
Van Eck’s expression was bemused. “Aren’t they one and the same?”
“When the Council finds out—” Inej began.
“The Council will never hear of this,” Van Eck said. “Why do you think I
chose scum from the Barrel as my champions? Oh, you are resourceful and
far more clever than any mercenaries, I give you that. But more important,
you will not be missed.”
Van Eck lifted his hand. The Tidemakers spun their arms. Kaz heard a yell
and turned to see a coil of water looming over Rotty. It slammed down on
the longboat, smashing it to bits as he dove for cover.
“None of you will leave this island, Mister Brekker. All of you will vanish,
and nobody will care.”
He raised his hand again, and the Tidemakers responded. A massive wave
roared towards the Ferolind.
“No!” cried Jesper.
“Van Eck!” shouted Kaz. “Your son is on that ship.”
Van Eck’s gaze snapped to Kaz. He blew his whistle. The Tidemakers froze,
awaiting instruction.
Reluctantly, Van Eck dropped his hand. They let the wave fall harmlessly,
the displaced sea sloshing against the side of the Ferolind.
“My son?” Van Eck said.
“Wylan Van Eck.”
“Mister Brekker, surely you must know that I sent my son packing months
ago.”
“I know you’ve written to Wylan every week since he left your household,
begging him to return.
Those are not the actions of a man who doesn’t care for his only son and
heir.”
Van Eck began to laugh – a warm, almost jovial chuckle, but its edges were
jagged and bitter.
“Let me tell you about my son.” He spat the word as if it were poison on his
lips. “He was meant to be heir to one of the greatest fortunes in all of
Kerch, an empire with shipping lines that reach all over the globe, one built
by my father, and my father ’s father. But my son, the boy meant to rule this
grand empire, cannot do what a child of seven years can. He can solve an
equation. He can paint and play the flute most prettily. What my son cannot
do, Mister Brekker, is read. He cannot write. I have hired the best tutors
from every corner of the world. I’ve tried specialists, tonics, beatings,
hypnotism.
But he refused to be taught. I finally had to accept that Ghezen saw fit to
curse me with a moron for a child. Wylan is a boy who will never grow to
be a man. He is a disgrace to my house.”
“The letters …” said Jesper, and Kaz could see the anger in his face. “You
weren’t pleading with him to come back. You were mocking him.”
Jesper was right. If you’re reading this, then you know how much I wish to
have you home. Every letter had been a slap in the face to Wylan, a kind of
cruel joke.
“He’s your son,” Jesper said.
“No, he is a mistake. One soon to be corrected. My lovely young wife is
carrying a child, and be it boy or girl or creature with horns, that child will
be my heir, not some soft-pated idiot who cannot read a hymnal, let alone a
ledger, not some fool who would make the Van Eck name a laughingstock.”
“You’re the fool,” Jesper snarled. “He’s smarter than most of us put
together, and he deserves a better father than you.”
“Deserved,” amended Van Eck. He blew the whistle twice.
The Tidemakers didn’t hesitate. Before anyone could draw breath to protest,
two huge walls of water rose and shot towards the Ferolind. They crushed
the ship between them with a resonant boom, sending debris flying.
Jesper screamed in rage and raised his guns.
“Jesper!” Kaz commanded. “Stand down!”
“He killed them,” Jesper said, face contorted. “He killed Wylan and Nina!”
Matthias laid a hand on his arm. “Jesper,” he said calmly. “Be still.”
Jesper looked back at the rocking waves, at the broken bits of mast and torn
sail where a ship had been only seconds before. “I don’t … I don’t
understand.”
“I confess to being a bit shocked, too, Mister Brekker,” said Van Eck. “No
tears? No righteous protests for your lost crew? They raise you cold in the
Barrel.”
“Cold and cautious,” said Kaz.
“Not cautious enough, it seems. At least you won’t live to regret your
mistakes.”
“Tell me, Van Eck. Will you do penance? Ghezen frowns on broken
contracts.”
Van Eck’s nostrils flared. “What have you given to the world, Mister
Brekker? Have you created wealth? Prosperity? No. You take from honest
men and women and serve only yourself. Ghezen shows his favour to those
who are deserving, to those who build cities, not the rats who eat away at
their foundations. He has blessed me and my dealings. You will perish, and
I will prosper. That is Ghezen’s will.”
“There’s just one problem, Van Eck. You’ll need Kuwei Yul-Bo to do it.”
“And how will you take him from me? You are outgunned and surrounded.”
“I don’t need to take him from you. You never had him. That’s not Kuwei
Yul-Bo.”
“A sorry bluff at best.”
“I’m not big on bluffing, am I, Inej?”
“Not as a rule.”
Van Eck’s lip curled. “And why is that?”
“Because he’d rather cheat,” said the boy who was not Kuwei Yul-Bo in
perfect, unaccented Kerch.
Van Eck startled at the sound of his voice, and Jesper flinched.
The Shu boy held out a hand. “Pay up, Kaz.”
Kaz sighed. “I do hate to lose a wager. You see, Van Eck, Wylan bet me that
you would have no qualms about ending his life. Call me sentimental, but I
didn’t believe a father could be so callous.”
Van Eck stared at Kuwei Yul-Bo – or the boy he’d believed to be Kuwei
Yul-Bo. Kaz watched him
wrestle with the reality of Wylan’s voice coming from Kuwei’s mouth.
Jesper looked just as incredulous. He’d get his explanation after Kaz got his
money.
“It’s not possible,” said Van Eck.
It shouldn’t have been. Nina had been a passable Tailor at best – but under
the influence of jurda parem, well, as Van Eck had once said, Things
become possible that simply shouldn’t be. A nearly perfect replica of Kuwei
Yul-Bo stood before them, but he had Wylan’s voice, his mannerisms, and –
though Kaz could see the fear and hurt in his golden eyes – Wylan’s
surprising courage, too.
After the battle in the Djerholm harbour, the merchling had come to Kaz to
warn him that he couldn’t be used as leverage against his father. Wylan had
been red-faced, barely able to speak the words of his supposed ‘affliction’.
Kaz had only shrugged. Some men were poets. Some were farmers. Some
were rich merchers. Wylan could draw a perfect elevation. He’d made a
drill that could cut through Grisha glass from parts of a gate and scavenged
bits of jewellery. So what if he couldn’t read?
Kaz had expected the boy to balk at the idea of being tailored to look like
Kuwei. A transformation that extreme was beyond the power of any Grisha
not using parem. “It may be permanent,” Kaz had warned him.
Wylan hadn’t cared. “I need to know. Once and for all, I need to know what
my father really thinks of me.”
And now he did.
Van Eck goggled at Wylan, searching for some sign of his son’s features. “It
can’t be.”
Wylan walked to Kaz’s side. “Maybe you can pray to Ghezen for
understanding, Father.”
Wylan was a bit taller than Kuwei, his face a bit rounder. But Kaz had seen
them side by side, and the likeness was extraordinary. Nina’s work,
performed on the ship before that first extraordinary high had begun to
wane, was nearly flawless.
Fury lashed across Van Eck’s features. “Worthless,” he hissed at Wylan. “I
knew you were a fool, but a traitor as well?”
“A fool would have been waiting to be smashed to bits on that ship. And as
for ‘traitor ’, you’ve called me worse in the last few minutes alone.”
“Just think,” Kaz said to Van Eck. “What if the real Kuwei Yul-Bo had been
on the ship you just turned into toothpicks?”
Van Eck’s voice was calm, but an angry flush had crept up his neck. “Where
is Kuwei Yul-Bo? ”
“Let us safely off this island with our payment, and I’ll gladly tell you.”
“You have no way out of this, Brekker. Your little crew is no match for my
Grisha.”
Kaz shrugged. “Kill us, and you’ll never find Kuwei.”
Van Eck appeared to consider this. Then he stepped back. “Guards to me!”
he shouted. “Kill everyone but Brekker!”
Kaz knew the instant he made his mistake. They’d all known it might come
to this. He should have trusted his crew. His eyes should have stayed trained
on Van Eck. Instead, in that moment of threat, when he should have thought
only of the fight, he looked at Inej.
And Van Eck saw it. He blew on his whistle. “Leave the others! Get the
money and the girl.”
Hold your ground, Kaz’s instincts said. Van Eck has the money. He is the
key. Inej can fend for herself. She’s a pawn, not the prize. But he was
already turning, already sprinting to get to her as the Grisha attacked.
The Tidemakers reached her first, vanishing into mist, then reappearing at
her side. But only a fool would to try to take Inej in close combat. The
Tidemakers were fast – vanishing and reappearing, grabbing at her. But she
was the Wraith, and her knives found heart, throat, spleen. Blood spilled
over the sand as the Tidemakers collapsed in two very solid heaps.
Kaz caught movement from the corner of his eye – a Squaller hurtling
toward Inej.
“Jesper!” he shouted.
Jesper fired, and the Squaller plummeted to the earth.
The next Squaller was smarter. He came in low, gliding over the ruins.
Jesper and Matthias opened fire, but they had to face the sun to shoot and
not even Jesper could aim blind. The Squaller barrelled into Inej and sped
upwards with her into the sky.
Stay still, Kaz urged her silently, his pistol drawn. But she didn’t. Her body
spun, and she slashed out. The Squaller ’s scream was distant. He released
her. Inej fell, plunging towards the sand. Kaz ran towards her without logic
or plan.
A blur cut through his vision. A third Squaller swooped down, snatching
her up seconds before impact and dealing her a vicious blow to the skull.
Kaz saw Inej’s body go limp.
“Bring him down!” roared Matthias.
“No!” shouted Kaz. “Shoot him and she falls, too!”
The Grisha dodged up and out of range, Inej clutched in his arms.
There was nothing they could do but stand there like fools and watch her
shape get smaller in the sky – a distant moon, a fading star, then gone.
Van Eck’s guards and Grisha closed in, sweeping the mercher and the trunk
of kruge through the air, onto the waiting brigantine. Vengeance for Jordie,
all Kaz had worked for, was slipping away. He didn’t care.
“You have one week to bring me the real Kuwei,” Van Eck shouted. “Or
they’ll hear that girl’s screams all the way back in Fjerda. And if that still
doesn’t move you, I’ll let it be known that you’re harbouring the most
valuable hostage in the world. Every gang, government, smuggler, and spy
will be after you and the Dregs. You’ll have nowhere to hide.”
“Kaz, I can make the shot,” said Jesper, rifle to his shoulder. “Van Eck is
still in range.”
And all would be lost – Inej, the money, everything.
“No,” Kaz said. “Let them go.”
The sea was flat; no breeze blew, but Van Eck’s remaining Squallers filled
the ship’s sails with a driving wind.
Kaz watched the brigantine surge across the water towards Ketterdam, to
safety, to a fortress built on Van Eck’s impeccable mercher reputation. He
felt as he had looking into the darkened windows of the house on
Zelverstraat. Helpless once more. He’d prayed to the wrong god.
Slowly, Jesper lowered his rifle.
“Van Eck will send soldiers and Grisha to search for Kuwei,” said Matthias.
“He won’t find him. Or Nina.” Not in the Slat or any other part of the
Barrel. Nowhere in Ketterdam. The previous night, Kaz had ordered Specht
to take Kuwei and Nina from the Ferolind in the second longboat – the one
he’d told Jesper was being repaired. They were safely stashed in the
abandoned cages below the old prison tower at Hellgate. Kaz had made a
few inquiries when he’d visited the harbour to contact Van Eck. After the
disaster at the Hellshow, the cages had been flooded to purge them of beasts
and bodies; they’d been empty ever since. Matthias had hated the idea of
letting Nina go anywhere without him, especially in her state, but Kaz had
convinced him that keeping her and Kuwei aboard the Ferolind would leave
them exposed.
Kaz marvelled at his own stupidity. Dumber than a pigeon fresh off the boat
and looking to make a fortune on East Stave. His greatest vulnerability had
been right beside him. And now she was gone.
Jesper was staring at Wylan, his eyes roving over the black hair, the golden
eyes. “Why?” he said at last. “Why would you do this?”
Wylan shrugged. “We needed leverage.”
“That’s Kaz’s voice talking.”
“I couldn’t let you all walk into a hostage exchange thinking I was some
kind of insurance.”
“Nina tailored you?”
“The night we left Djerholm.”
“That’s why you disappeared during the journey,” said Jesper. “You weren’t
helping Matthias care for Nina. You were hiding.”
“I didn’t hide.”
“You … how many times was it you standing beside me on the deck at
night when I thought it was Kuwei?”
“Every time.”
“Nina might not be able to put you back, you know. Not without another
dose of parem. You could be stuck like this.”
“Why does it matter?”
“I don’t know!” Jesper said angrily. “Maybe I liked your stupid face.” He
turned to Matthias. “You knew. Wylan knew. Inej knew. Everyone but me.”
“Ask me why, Jesper,” Kaz said, his patience at an end.
Jesper shifted uneasily on his feet. “Why?”
“You were the one who sold us out to Pekka Rollins.” He thrust an
accusatory finger at Jesper.
“You’re the reason we were ambushed when we tried to leave Ketterdam.
You almost got us all killed.”
“I didn’t tell Pekka Rollins anything. I never—”
“You told one of the Dime Lions you were leaving Kerch, but that you’d be
coming into big money, didn’t you?”
Jesper swallowed. “I had to. They were leaning on me hard. My father ’s
farm—”
“I told you not to tell anyone you were leaving the country. I warned you to
keep your mouth shut.”
“I didn’t have a choice! You had me locked up in the Crow Club before we
left. If you’d let me—”
Kaz turned on him. “Let you what? Play a few hands of Three Man
Bramble? Dig yourself deeper in with every boss in the Barrel stupid
enough to extend you credit? You told a member of Pekka’s gang you were
about to be flush.”
“I didn’t know he’d go to Pekka. Or that Pekka knew about parem. I was
just trying to buy myself some time.”
“Saints, Jesper, you really haven’t learned anything in the Dregs, have you?
You’re still the same dumb farm boy who stepped off the boat.”
Jesper lunged for him, and Kaz felt a surge of giddy violence. Finally, a
fight he could win. But Matthias stepped between them, holding them each
back with a massive hand. “Stop. Stop this.”
Kaz didn’t want to stop. He wanted to beat them all bloody and then brawl
his way through the Barrel.
“Matthias is right,” said Wylan. “We need to think about what’s next.”
“There is no next,” Kaz snarled. Van Eck would see to that. They couldn’t
go back to the Slat or get help from Per Haskell and the other Dregs. Van
Eck would be watching, waiting to pounce. He’d turn the Barrel, Kaz’s
home, his little kingdom, into hostile territory.
“Jesper made a mistake,” said Wylan. “A stupid mistake, but he didn’t set
out to betray anyone.”
Kaz stalked away, trying to clear his head. He knew Jesper hadn’t realised
what he was setting in motion, but he also knew he could never really trust
Jesper again. And maybe he’d kept him in the dark about Wylan because he
wanted to punish him a little.
In a few hours, when they’d failed to make contact, Specht would row out
for them in the longboat.
For now, there was nothing but the flat grey of the sky and the dead rock of
this miserable excuse for an island. And Inej’s absence. Kaz wanted to hit
someone. He wanted someone to hit him.
He surveyed what remained of his crew. Rotty still hovered by the
wreckage of the longboat.
Jesper sat with elbows on knees, head in hands, Wylan beside him wearing
the face of a near-stranger; Matthias stood gazing across the water in the
direction of Hellgate like a stone sentinel. If Kaz was their leader, then Inej
had been their lodestone, pulling them together when they seemed most
likely to drift apart.
Nina had disguised Kaz’s crow-and-cup tattoo before they’d entered the Ice
Court, but he hadn’t let her near the R on his bicep. Now he touched his
gloved fingers to where the sleeve of his coat covered that mark. Without
meaning to, he’d let Kaz Rietveld return. He didn’t know if it had begun
with Inej’s injury or that hideous ride in the prison wagon, but somehow
he’d let it happen and it had cost him dearly.
That didn’t mean he was going to let himself be bested by some thieving
merch.
Kaz looked south towards Ketterdam’s harbours. The beginnings of an idea
scratched at the back of his skull, an itch, the barest inkling. It wasn’t a
plan, but it might be the start of one. He could see the shape it would take –
impossible, absurd, and requiring a serious chunk of cash.
“Scheming face,” murmured Jesper.
“Definitely,” agreed Wylan.
Matthias folded his arms. “Digging in your bag of tricks, demjin?”
Kaz flexed his fingers in his gloves. How did you survive the Barrel? When
they took everything from you, you found a way to make something from
nothing.
“I’m going to invent a new trick,” Kaz said. “One Van Eck will never
forget.” He turned to the others. If he could have gone after Inej alone, he
would have, but not even he could pull that off. “I’ll need the right crew.”
Wylan got to his feet. “For the Wraith.”
Jesper followed, still not meeting Kaz’s eyes. “For Inej,” he said quietly.
Matthias gave a single sharp nod.
Inej had wanted Kaz to become someone else, a better person, a gentler
thief. But that boy had no place here. That boy ended up starving in an
alley. He ended up dead. That boy couldn’t get her back.
I’m going to get my money, Kaz vowed. And I’m going to get my girl. Inej
could never be his, not really, but he would find a way to give her the
freedom he’d promised her so long ago.
Dirtyhands had come to see the rough work done.
Pekka Rollins tucked a wad of jurda into his cheek and leaned back in his
chair to survey the raggedy crew Doughty had brought to his office. Rollins
lived above the Emerald Palace in a grand suite of rooms, every inch of
them covered in gilt and green velvet. He loved flash – in his clothes, his
friends, and his women.
The kids standing before him were the opposite of anything properly
stylish. They wore the costumes of the Komedie Brute, but no one got
access to his office without showing his face, so the masks had come off.
He recognised some of them. He’d hoped to recruit the Heartrender Nina
Zenik at some point, but now she looked as if she might not last out the
month – all jutting bones, dark hollows, and trembling hands. Seemed he’d
dodged a bad investment there. She leaned against a giant Fjerdan with a
shaved head and grim blue eyes. He was huge, probably former military.
Good muscle to have around. Where did Kaz Brekker find these people?
The boy next to them was Shu, but he looked far too young to be the
scientist they’d all been so desperate to get their hands on. Besides, Brekker
would never bring such a prize to the Emerald Palace. And then, of course,
Rollins knew Jesper Fahey. The sharpshooter had run up an astonishing
amount of debt at nearly every gambling den on East Stave. His loose talk
had put Rollins wise to the knowledge that Brekker was sending a team to
Fjerda. A little digging and a lot of bribes had yielded the where and when
of their departure – intelligence that had proved faulty. Brekker had been
one step ahead of the him and the Dime Lions. The little canal rat had
managed to make it to the Ice Court after all.
It was a good thing, too. If not for Kaz Brekker, Rollins would still be
sitting in a cell in that damned Fjerdan prison waiting for another round of
torture – or maybe looking down from a pike atop the ringwall.
When Brekker had picked the lock on his prison cell door, Rollins hadn’t
known if he was about to be rescued or assassinated. He’d heard plenty
about Kaz Brekker since he’d risen to prominence in the Dregs – that sorry
outfit Per Haskell called a gang – and he’d seen him around the Barrel a
few times. The boy had come from nowhere and been a slew of trouble
since. But he was still just a lieutenant, not a general, a terrier nipping at
Rollins’ ankles.
“Hello, Brekker,” Rollins had said. “Come to gloat?”
“Not exactly. You know me?”
Rollins had shrugged. “Sure, you’re the little skiv who keeps stealing my
customers.”
The look that passed over the boy’s face then had taken Rollins aback. It
was hatred – pure, black, long simmering. What have I ever done to this
little pissant? But in seconds the look was gone, and Rollins wondered if
he’d imagined it altogether.
“What do you want, Brekker?”
The boy had stood there, something bleak and mad in his gaze. “I want to
do you a favour.”
Rollins noted Brekker ’s bare feet and prison clothes, the hands shorn of his
legendary black gloves – a ridiculous affectation. “You don’t look like
you’re in a position to do anyone favours, kid.”
“I’m going to leave this door unlocked. You’re not stupid enough to go after
Bo Yul-Bayur without a crew to back you. Wait for your moment and get
out.”
“Why the hell would you help me?”
“You weren’t meant to die here.”
Somehow it sounded like a curse.
“I owe you, Brekker,” Rollins had said as the boy exited his cell, hardly
believing his luck.
Brekker had glanced back at him, his dark eyes like caverns. “Don’t worry,
Rollins. You’ll pay.”
And apparently the boy had come to collect. He stood in the middle of
Rollins’ opulent office looking like a dark blot of ink, his face grim, his
hands resting on a crow-handled walking stick.
Rollins wasn’t surprised to see him, exactly. Word had it that the exchange
between Brekker and Van Eck had gone sour and that Van Eck had eyes on
the Slat and the rest of Kaz Brekker ’s haunts. But Van Eck wasn’t watching
the Emerald Palace. He had no reason to. Rollins wasn’t even sure the
merch knew he had made it back from Fjerda alive.
When Brekker finished explaining the bare bones of the situation, Rollins
shrugged and said, “You got double-crossed. You want my advice, give
Kuwei to Van Eck and be done with it.”
“I’m not here for advice.”
“The merchers like the taxes we pay. They let the occasional bank heist or
housebreak slide, but they expect us to stay here in the Barrel and leave
them to their business. You go to war with Van Eck, and all that changes.”
“Van Eck’s gone rogue. If the Merchant Council knew—”
“And who’s going to tell them? A canal rat from the worst slum in the
Barrel? Don’t kid yourself, Brekker. Cut your losses and live to fight
another day.”
“I fight every day. You’re telling me you’d just walk away?”
“Look, you want to shoot yourself in the foot – the good foot – I’m happy
to watch you do it. But I’m not going to ally with you. Not against a merch.
No one will. You’re not courting a little gang war, Brekker. You’ll have the
stadwatch, the Kerch army and its navy arrayed against you. They’ll burn
the Slat to the ground with the old man in it, and they’ll take Fifth Harbour
back, too.”
“I don’t expect you to fight beside me, Rollins.”
“Then what do you want? It’s yours. Within reason.”
“I need to get a message to the Ravkan capital. Fast.”
Rollins shrugged. “Easy enough.”
“And I need money.”
“Shocking. How much?”
“Two hundred thousand kruge.”
Rollins nearly choked on his laughter. “Anything else, Brekker? The
Lantsov Emerald? A dragon
who craps rainbows?”
“You have the money to spare, Rollins. And I saved your life.”
“Then you should have negotiated back in that cell. I’m not a bank,
Brekker. And even if I were, given your current situation, I’d say you’re a
pretty poor credit risk.”
“I don’t want a loan.”
“You want me to give you two hundred thousand kruge? And what do I get
for this generous gesture?”
Brekker ’s jaw set. “My shares in the Crow Club and Fifth Harbour.”
Rollins sat up straighter. “You’d sell your stake?”
“Yes. And for another hundred thousand I’ll throw in an original
DeKappel.”
Rollins leaned back and pressed his fingers together. “It’s not enough, you
know. Not to go to war with the Merchant Council.”
“It is for this crew.”
“This crew?” Rollins said with a snort. “I can’t believe you sorry lot were
the ones to successfully raid the Ice Court.”
“Believe it.”
“Van Eck is going to put you in the ground.”
“Others have tried. Somehow I keep coming back from the dead.”
“I respect your drive, kid. And I understand. You want your money; you
want the Wraith back; you want a bit of Van Eck’s hide—”
“No,” said Brekker, his voice part rasp, part growl. “When I come for Van
Eck, I won’t just take what’s mine. I’ll carve his life hollow. I’ll burn his
name from the ledger. There will be nothing left.”
Pekka Rollins couldn’t count the threats he’d heard, the men he’d killed, or
the men he’d seen die, but the look in Brekker ’s eye still sent a chill
slithering up his spine. Some wrathful thing in this boy was begging to get
loose, and Rollins didn’t want to be around when it slipped its leash.
“Open the safe, Doughty.”
Rollins doled out the cash to Brekker, then had him write out a transfer
order for his shares in the Crow Club and the goldmine that was Fifth
Harbour. When he held out his hand to shake on the deal, Brekker ’s grip
was knuckle-crushing.
“You don’t remember me at all, do you?” the boy asked.
“Should I?”
“Not just yet.” That black thing flickered behind Brekker ’s eyes.
“The deal is the deal,” said Rollins, eager to be done with this strange lot.
“The deal is the deal.”
When they’d gone, Rollins peered through the big glass window that
overlooked the gambling floor of the Emerald Palace.
“An unexpectedly profitable end to the day, Doughty.”
Doughty grunted agreement, surveying the action taking place at the tables
below – dice, cards, Makker ’s Wheel, fortunes won and lost, and a
delicious slice of all of it came to Rollins.
“What’s with those gloves he wears?” the bruiser asked.
“A bit of theatre, I suspect. Who knows? Who cares?”
Rollins watched Brekker and his crew moving through the crowded
gambling hall. They opened
the doors to the street, and for a brief moment, they were silhouetted against
the lamplight in their masks and capes – a cripple trailed by a bunch of kids
in costumes. Some gang. Brekker was a wily thief and tough enough, Pekka
supposed, inventive, too. But unlike those poor stooges at the Ice Court,
Van Eck would be ready for Brekker. The boy was going into a real battle.
He didn’t stand a chance.
Rollins reached for his watch. It had to be about time for the dealers to
change shifts, and he liked to supervise them himself.
“Son of a bitch,” he exclaimed a second later.
“What is it, boss?”
Rollins held up his watch chain. A turnip was hanging from the fob where
his diamond-studded timepiece should have been. “That little bastard—”
Then a thought came to him. He reached for his wallet. It was gone. So was
his tie pin, the Kaelish coin pendant he wore for luck, and the gold buckles
on his shoes. Rollins wondered if he should check the fillings in his teeth.
“He picked your pocket?” Doughty asked incredulously.
No one got one over on Pekka Rollins. No one dared. But Brekker had, and
Rollins wondered if
that was just the beginning.
“Doughty,” he said, “I think we’d best say a prayer for Jan Van Eck.”
“You think Brekker can best him?”
“It’s a long shot, but if he’s not careful, I think that merch might walk
himself right onto the gallows and let Brekker tighten the noose.” Rollins
sighed. “We better hope Van Eck kills that boy.”
“Why?”
“Because otherwise I’ll have to.”
Rollins straightened the knot of his pinless tie and headed down to the
casino floor. The problem of Kaz Brekker could wait to be solved another
day. Right now there was money to be made.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I have a degenerative condition called osteonecrosis. This basically
translates to ‘bone death’, which sounds kind of gothy and romantic, but
actually means that every step I take is painful and that I sometimes need to
walk with a cane. It’s no coincidence I chose to create a protagonist
struggling with similar symptoms, and I often felt that Kaz and I were
limping along this road together. We wouldn’t have made it to ‘The End’
without a lot of wonderful people.
All the love to my crew of outcasts and troublemakers: Michi, Rachael,
Sarah, Robyn, Josh, and especially Morgan, who gave this book its name
and helped me finish it. Many thanks also to Jimmy, who dragged me off to
Santa Barbara and smashed my writer ’s block just by being wonderful.
Bless Noa Wheeler for helping me solve this particular puzzle and for
staying patient when I get prickly and bring out the whiteboard. I am deeply
grateful to Jean Feiwel, Laura Godwin, Jon Yaged, Molly Brouillette,
Elizabeth Fithian, Rich Deas, April Ward, and the countless people at Henry
Holt and Macmillan Children’s who have helped bring the Grisha world to
life and who let me continue to explore it with readers. Joanna Volpe at
New Leaf: ‘Stalwart and true’ should definitely be on your résumé. I can
face just about any challenge knowing you have my back. Thanks also to
Pouya ‘he was a young’ Shahbazian, Kathleen Ortiz, Danielle Barthel,
JaidaTemperly, and Jess Dallow. And a big thank you to Team Grisha in the
UK: Fiona Kennedy, and the wonderful crew at Orion – most especially
Nina Douglas, who is an extraordinary publicist, an excellent travelling
companion, and a born Ravenclaw. Thank you to the readers, librarians,
booksellers, BookTubers, and bloggers who celebrate stories all over the
world.
Any good heist requires talented specialists, and I’ve been aided by the
best:
Steven Klein offered invaluable expertise on how beginners learn magic
and pointed me to the work of Eric Mead and Apollo Robbins, gentleman
thief. Angela DePace did her best to help me find a real way to knock out a
room full of prisoners, but the chloro pellet ended up being a work of pure
fabrikation. (Don’t try it at home.) Richard Wheeler advised me on how
government buildings and high-security facilities actually keep out ne’erdo-wells. Emily Stein walked me through knife wounds and introduced me
to the beautiful phrase ‘apex of the heart’. Conlang king David Peterson
tried to nudge me in the right direction and let me be very stubborn about
straats. And Hedwig Aerts, my dear friend and Soberumi, thank you for
helping me mangle Dutch more thoughtfully.
Marie Lu, Amie Kaufman, Robin LaFevers, Jessica Brody, and Gretchen
McNeil keep me laughing
and put up with so much whining. Thanks also to Robin Wasserman, Holly
Black, Sarah Rees Brennan, Kelly Link, and Cassandra Clare for plot
advice, margaritas, and foisting Teen Wolf upon me. I will never be the
same. Anna Carey can be blamed for the Fjerdan guard’s nosebleed. Send
her your complaints.
Christine, Sam, Emily, and Ryan, I am so lucky to call you family. And
dearest Lulu, you have failed your city. Thank you for weathering my
moods and caring about my little band of thugs.
Many books helped Ketterdam, the Barrel, and my team of crows take
shape, but the most essential titles were Sarah Wise’s The Blackest Streets:
The Life and Death of a Victorian Slum; The Coffee Trader by David Liss;
Amsterdam: A History of the World’s Most Liberal City by Russell Shorto;
Criminal Slang: The Vernacular of the Underworld Lingo by Vincent J.
Monteleone; David Maurer ’s The Big Con: The Story of the Confidence
Man; and Stealing Rembrandts: The Untold Stories of Notorious Art Heists
by Anthony M. Amore and Tom Mashberg.
One more thing: This book wanted to be revised to the sounds of the Black
Keys, the Clash, and the Pixies, but it was born in a drafty old schoolhouse
with In a Time Lapse playing on a continuous loop, and a bat flapping
around the eaves. Many thanks to composer Ludovico Einaudi. And the bat.
TO READ MORE ABOUT THE MAGICAL WORLD OF THE GRISHA,
LOOK OUT FOR
SHADOW AND BONE
SIEGE AND STORM
RUIN AND RISING
Copyright
AN INDIGO EBOOK
First published in Great Britain in 2015 by Indigo
This eBook first published in 2015 by Indigo
Text © Leigh Bardugo 2015
Map © Keith Thompson 2015
Ice Palace illustration © Keith Thompson 2015
The right of Leigh Bardugo to be identified as the author of this work has
been asserted by her in accordance with the copyright, designs and patents
act 1988.
All characters and events in this publication are fictitious and any
resemblance to real persons, living or dead, is purely coincidental.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means without the
prior permission in writing of the publisher, nor be otherwise circulated in
any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published without
a similar condition, including this condition, being imposed on the
subsequent purchaser.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 978 1 7806 2229 3
Indigo
An imprint of Hachette Children’s Group
Part of Hodder and Stoughton Ltd
Carmelite House
50 Victoria Embankment
London EC4Y 0DZ
An Hachette UK Company
www.orionchildrensbooks.co.uk
Document Outline
Praise for Six of Crows
Title Page
Contents
Dedication
Maps
The Grisha
Part 1: Shadow Business
1 Joost
2 Inej
3 Kaz
4 Inej
5 Kaz
6 Nina
Part 2: Servant and Lever
7 Matthias
8 Jesper
9 Kaz
10 Inej
11 Jesper
12 Inej
13 Kaz
14 Nina
15 Matthias
Part 3: Heartsick
16 Inej
17 Jesper
18 Kaz
19 Matthias
20 Nina
Part 4: The Trick to Falling
21 Inej
22 Kaz
23 Jesper
24 Nina
25 Inej
26 Kaz
Part 5: The Ice Does Not Forgive
27 Jesper
28 Inej
29 Matthias
30 Jesper
31 Nina
32 Jesper
33 Inej
34 Nina
35 Matthias
36 Jesper
37 Nina
38 Kaz
Part 6: Proper Thieves
39 Inej
40 Nina
41 Matthias
42 Inej
43 Nina
44 Jesper
45 Kaz
46 Pekka
Acknowledgements
Copyright